---
arxiv_id: '2209.10507'
title: 'Gemino: Practical and Robust Neural Compression for Video Conferencing'
authors:
- Vibhaalakshmi Sivaraman
- Pantea Karimi
- Vedantha Venkatapathy
- Mehrdad Khani
- Sadjad Fouladi
- Mohammad Alizadeh
- Frédo Durand
- Vivienne Sze
submitted: '2022-09-21'
categories:
- cs.NI
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.10507
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 8/73
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:25:56+00:00'
references_parsed: 73
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Video conferencing applications have become a crucial part of modern life. However, today’s systems continue to suffer from poor user experience: in particular, poor video quality and unwelcome disruptions are all too common. Many of these problems are rooted in the inability of today’s applications to operate in low-bandwidth scenarios. For instance, Zoom recommends a minimum bandwidth of 1.2 Mbps for one-on-one meetings and 2-3 Mbps for group meetings . In certain parts of the world, Internet broadband speeds remain insufficient for reliable video conferencing. For example, large swaths of the population in Africa and Asia had average Internet broadband speeds less than 10 Mbps in 2022 , with the five slowest countries having speeds under 1 Mbps. Mobile bandwidth is even more restricted: SpeedTest’s Global Index  suggest that global mobile bandwidth average is 50% of broadband speeds. Even in regions of North America and Europe with high broadband speeds , over 30% of users surveyed about their video conferencing experience claimed that “video quality” issues were their biggest pain point . This is because the user experience is not just determined by the average bandwidth, but rather by tail events of low bandwidth (a few seconds every 5–10 minutes) that cause glitches and disrupt the video call. When the network deteriorates, even briefly, existing video conferencing solutions cope to an extent by lowering quality, but below a certain bandwidth (e.g., 100s of Kbps for HD video), they must either suspend the transmission altogether or risk packet loss and frame corruption.

Recently, several neural approaches for face image synthesis have been proposed that deliver extreme compression by generating each video frame from a sparse representation (*e.g.,* keypoints) . These techniques have the potential to enable video conferencing with one to two orders of magnitude reduction in bandwidth (as low as \sim 10 Kbps ), but their lack of robustness and high computational complexity hampers their practicality. Specifically, synthesis approaches work by “warping” a reference image into different target poses and orientations captured by such sparse keypoints. These methods produce good reconstructions when the difference between the reference and the target image is small, but they fail (possibly catastrophically) in the presence of large movements or occlusions. In such cases, they produce poor reconstructions, for both low-frequency content (*e.g.,* missing the presence of a hand in a frame altogether) and high-frequency content (*e.g.,* details of clothing and facial hair). As a result, while synthesis approaches show promising average-case behavior, their performance at the tail is riddled with inconsistencies in practice. Furthermore, real-time reconstruction is only feasible at low resolution for such models , even on high-end GPUs, while typical video conference applications are designed for HD, Full HD, and even 4K videos . Naïvely reusing these models on larger input frames can quickly become prohibitively expensive as the resolution is increased.

<figure id="fig:prelim results">
<embed src="figures/fom_results.pdf" style="width:75.0%" />
<figcaption>Quality of faces in different poses as reconstructed by the First-Order Model <span class="citation" data-cites="fom"></span> using 10 facial keypoints (dots) and a reference frame on <span class="math inline">256 × 256</span> videos from the VoxCeleb <span class="citation" data-cites="voxceleb"></span> dataset. The model’s prediction is close to the target frame especially when the reference and target frames are close in pose (bottom) while the finer details of the mouth, eye, and hair are less accurate when the reference and target are further apart (top).</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:model structure">
<embed src="figures/model_structure.pdf" />
<figcaption>Gemino’s design. The sender sends a downsampled version of the target frame across the network to the receiver that has a reference image of the speaker in the current video conference setting. The encoder network encodes and warps features from the reference image based on the motion estimated between the reference and target frames. The decoder network at the receiver upsamples the downsampled frame with help from the warped encoded reference features.</figcaption>
</figure>

We present Gemino, a neural compression system for low-bitrate video conferencing, designed to overcome the above robustness and compute complexity challenges. Gemino targets extreme compression scenarios, such as delivering video in $`\sim`$<!-- -->100 Kbps or less. At such bitrates, the bandwidth required for video becomes comparable to a typical audio call , greatly expanding the range of networks that can support video conferencing.

Gemino’s design begins with the observation that current synthesis approaches, in an effort to squeeze the most compression, overly rely on keypoints, a modality with limited semantic information about the target frame. This causes several inevitable failures (§<a href="#sec:motivation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:motivation">[sec:motivation]</a>). For example, if a user’s hand is absent in the reference frame but appears in the target, there is no way to reconstruct the hand by warping the reference image. We would need to send a new reference frame that includes the hand, but sending a high-resolution frame (even occasionally) incurs significant cost. Instead, Gemino directly transmits low-resolution video, which includes significantly more information about the target frame, and upsamples it to the desired resolution at the receiver. Using low-resolution video is viable because modern codecs  compress them very efficiently. For example, sending 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 resolution video in our implementation consumes $`\sim`$<!-- -->15 Kbps, only slightly more than would be needed to transmit keypoints . We posit that the robustness benefits of providing the receiver with more information for reconstruction far outweigh the marginal bandwidth cost.

It is challenging to upsample a video significantly while reconstructing high-frequency details accurately. For example, at 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 resolution, we can see high-frequency texture details of skin, hair, and clothing, that are not visible at 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 resolution. To improve high-frequency reconstruction fidelity, Gemino uses a reference frame that provides such texture information in a different pose than the target frame. Like synthesis approaches, it warps features extracted from this reference frame based on the motion between the reference and target frames, but it combines it with information extracted from the low-resolution target image to generate the final reconstruction (Fig. <a href="#fig:model structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model structure">2</a>). We call this new approach *high-frequency-conditional super-resolution*.

**FD:** Wondering if it could be introduced slightly more as a system and less as a codec. **FD:** Wondering if solutions can be linked to goals more. e.g. low res stream helps with robustness Our key insight is to generate high-fidelity reconstructions of talking heads in a video conferencing session by combining super resolution from a low-resolution version of the target frame with information from a single high-resolution *reference frame* that informs us of the texture and conditions of the video conference. We deem this new approach *conditional super-resolution*, since it performs super-resolution conditioned on features from a high-resolution reference image. **FD:** Now that I think about it, suprres is always conditional in that it is conditioned on the low-res image (as opposed to unconditional GAN synthesis). see e.g. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.01406.pdf. Although people also talk about class-conditional superres. I wonder if we should similarly talk about X-conditional. Like high-freq-conditional. The basic idea is to transmit a low-resolution version of the target video, and upsample it at the receiver to the desired resolution via a neural super-resolution approach that is aided by high-frequency features that are warped based on the motion between the target and the reference (Fig. <a href="#fig:model structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model structure">2</a>). We observe that current approaches, in an effort to squeeze the most compression, rely too much on keypoints, a modality with limited semantic information on the target frame. However, that causes a number of failures (§<a href="#sec:motivation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:motivation">[sec:motivation]</a>). On the other hand, low-resolution video has a lot of semantic information, but is very hard to super-resolve with an accurate reconstruction of the high-frequency details. Our approach is designed to combine the best of both worlds. It is particularly viable because modern codecs  are so efficient that downsampled video frames can be compressed at very low bitrates. For instance, in our implementation, we observe that at a resolution of 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 (an 8$`\times`$ downsampling in each dimension) from our target resolution), the video can be compressed to 15 Kbps, a number comparable to keypoints but with far more information for reconstruction. **SF:** I think an uninitiated reader may need a little handholding to go through this paragraph – maybe break it into two?

Gemino uses several further optimizations to improve reconstruction fidelity and reduce computation cost. First, we *personalize* the model by fine-tuning it on videos of a specific person so that it can learn the high-frequency detail associated with that person (e.g., hair, skin wrinkles, *etc.*). Personalizing the model makes it easier to transition texture information from the reference to the target frame. Second, we train the neural network using decompressed low-resolution frames obtained from a standard codec so that it learns to reconstruct accurate target frames despite codec-induced artifacts. We design Gemino to work with any starting resolution so that it can achieve different rate-distortion tradeoffs based on the available network bandwidth. The resolution at a particular bitrate is chosen by profiling standard codecs and picking the highest resolution that can achieve that bitrate.

Lastly, as the target resolution increases, it is essential to reduce the number of operations required per-pixel for synthesis. Otherwise, the compute overheads of running neural networks at higher resolutions become prohibitively high. To achieve this compute reduction, we design a *multi-scale* architecture wherein different parts of the model operate at different resolutions. For instance, the module that produces the warping field uses low-resolution versions of the reference and target images, while the encoder and decoder networks[^1] operate at full resolution but are equipped with additional downsampling blocks to reduce the operations per pixel. This design allows us to obtain good reconstruction quality while keeping the reconstruction real time. The multi-scale architecture will be particularly salient as we transition to higher resolution video conferencing applications in the future. We also further optimize our model using neural architecture search techniques such as NetAdapt  to reduce the compute footprint.

We implement and evaluate Gemino within *aiortc* , a Python implementation of WebRTC, and show the following:

1.  Gemino achieves a perceptual quality (LPIPS)  of 0.21 at 105 Kbps, a $`5\times`$ and $`2.2\times`$ reduction from VP8 and VP9’s default Chromium and WebRTC settings respectively.

2.  In lower bitrate regimes where current video conferencing applications *cannot* operate, Gemino outperforms bicubic upsampling and SwinIR  super-resolution from compressed downsampled VPX [^2] frames. Gemino requires 50 Kbps to achieve an LPIPS of 0.23, a 2$`\times`$ and 3.9$`\times`$ reduction compared to bicubic and super-resolution.

3.  Our model transitions smoothly across resolutions, and between generated and synthetic video, achieving different rate-distortion tradeoffs based on the target bitrate.

4.  Our model benefits considerably ($`\sim`$ 0.04 in LPIPS) from personalization and including the VPX codec at train-time ($`\sim`$<!-- -->0.05 in LPIPS). Our optimizations atop the multi-scale architecture enable real-time inference on 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 frames on a Titan X GPU.

# Related Work

. Most video applications rely on standard video compression modules (codecs) such as H.264/H.265 , VP8/VP9 , and AV1 . These codecs separate video frames into keyframes (I-frames) that exploit spatial redundancies within a frame, and predicted frames (P-/B-frames) that exploit temporal—as well as spatial—redundancies across frames. Over the years, these standards have been improved through ideas like variable block sizes  and low-resolution encoding for lower bitrates . These codecs are particularly efficient in their *slow* modes when they have generous time and compute budget to compress a video at high quality. However, these codecs still require a few hundred Kbps for real-time applications such as video conferencing, even at moderate resolutions like 720p. In low-bandwidth scenarios, these codecs cannot do much other than transmit at the worst quality, and suffer packet loss and frame corruption . To circumvent this, some applications  switch to lower resolutions when the network degrades. However, as new video conferencing solutions such as Google’s Starline  with a large bandwidth footprint are introduced, these concerns with current codecs become more acute.

Linear single-image super-resolution (SR) methods  provide robust quality enhancements in various contexts. Neural SR methods have further enhanced the upsampling quality by learning better interpolation or in-painting methods . Video SR methods  build on image SR but further improve the reconstruction by exploiting redundant information in adjacent low-res video frames. Certain approaches like FAST  and Nemo  further optimize SR for video generation by performing SR only on “anchor frames” and generating the rest by upsampling motion vectors and residuals. For video conferencing, domain-specific SR has also shown promising outcomes utilizing facial characteristics and training losses in their models . However, to the best of our knowledge, none of these prior methods study upsampling conditioned on a high-resolution image from the same context. Unlike pure SR methods, Gemino provides access to high-resolution reference frames and learns models that jointly in-paint and propagate high-frequency details from the reference frame. In recent work, SRVC  uses content-specific super-resolution to upsample a low-resolution video stream. Our approach is similar to SRVC in that it designs a model adapted to a specific person. However, to enable real-time encoding, Gemino only customizes the model once per person rather than continuously adapting it throughout the video.

The inability of traditional codecs to operate at extremely low bitrates for high-resolution videos has led researchers to consider neural approaches that reconstruct video from very compact representations. Neural codecs have been designed for video-streaming , live-video , and video video conferencing . Swift  learns to compress and decompress based on the residuals in a layered-encoding stack. Both NAS  and LiveNAS  enhance video quality using one or more DNN models at either the client for video streaming, or the ingest server for live video. The models have knobs to control the compute overheads by using a smaller Deep Neural Network (DNN) , or by adjusting the number of epochs over which they are fine-tuned online . All of these approaches have shown improvements in the bits-per-pixel consumption across a wide range of videos.

However, video conferencing differs from other video applications in a few ways. First, the video is unavailable ahead of time to optimize for the best compression-quality tradeoff. Moreover, the interactivity of the application demands that the video be both compressed and decompressed with low-latency. Second, the videos belong to a specific distribution consisting primarily of facial data. This allows for a more targeted model for generating videos of faces. A number of such models have been proposed  over the years. These models use keypoints or facial landmarks as a compact intermediary representation of a specific pose, to compute the movement between two poses before generating the reconstruction. The models may use 3D keypoints , off-the-shelf keypoint detectors , or multiple reference frames  to enhance prediction.

<span id="sec:motivation" label="sec:motivation"></span> Neural synthesis approaches and specifically, keypoint-based models fall short in a number of ways that make them impractical in a video conferencing setting. These models operate similarly to the model described in Fig. <a href="#fig:model structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model structure">2</a> but do not transmit or use the downsampled target frame. They extract keypoints from the downsampled target frame, and transmit those instead. This choice causes major reconstruction failures when the reference and target frames are not close. Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a> shows the reconstruction produced by the First-Order-Motion Model (FOMM) , a keypoint-based model, on 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 frames. We focus on the FOMM as a representative keypoint-based model, but these limitations extend to other such models. The FOMM only produces blurry outlines of the faces in rows 1 and 3 where the reference and target differ in orientation and zoom level respectively. In row 2, the FOMM misses the arm altogether because it was not present in the reference frame and warping alone cannot convey the arm’s presence. Such failures occur because keypoints are limited in their representation of differences across frames, and most warping fields cannot be modeled as small deformations around each keypoint. Poor prediction quality in the event of such movements in video calls seriously disrupts the user experience.

<figure id="fig:fom failures">
<embed src="figures/fom_vs_ours_1024.pdf" />
<figcaption>Failure cases in the FOMM’s <span class="citation" data-cites="fom"></span> reconstruction when the reference and target differ. FOMM misses the hand (row 2) because the reference frame does not contain it. In rows 1 and 3, FOMM only produces a blurry outline of the face (and torso). Gemino improves on these reconstructions by utilizing the downsampled target frame in its architecture and capturing the difference between the reference and the target better.</figcaption>
</figure>

Secondly, even in regions without much movement between the reference and the target frames, current approaches do not have good fidelity to high-frequency details. In row 2 of Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a>, the microphone does not move much between the reference and the target, but possesses a lot of high-frequency detail in its grille and stand. Yet, the FOMM has a poor reconstruction of that area. In row 1 of Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a>, it misses even those details in the hair that are similar between the reference and the target. This issue becomes more pronounced at higher resolutions where more high-frequency content is present in each frame, and where the human eye is more sensitive to missing details.

**FD:** This should be shorter and part of the related work, if it’s there at all. What is the goal of this section? At the end of the day, our approach is not that related to them, is it? The answer to these questions also has impact on the following sections. That’s a big high-level issue that needs to be figured out.

**FD:** I’d say this is a typical case where we are telling the story of how the research evolved from its inception, but we need to take a fresh start and describe it as it is now.

Fig. <a href="#fig:model structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model structure">2</a> describes the structure of a generative model that reconstructs faces from keypoints in the context of a video-conferencing system. The model, based on the First-Order-Motion Model (FOMM) , transforms a fixed *reference* image into different orientations based on facial landmarks (keypoints). In a video conference, the sender transmits keypoint information for each new *target* frame, and the receiver reconstructs the target frame using the reference image and the keypoint data.

The FOMM consists of a keypoint detector, motion estimation module, and a generator. The keypoint detector takes in the reference image and extracts the keypoints in the reference coordinate system; this information is stored at the receiver. For each target frame, the sender runs the keypoint detector to obtain keypoints in the target coordinate system and transmits them over the network to the receiver. The receiver runs the motion estimation module to produce a warping field that captures how to move from the reference coordinate system to the target coordinate system. To reconstruct the target image, the receiver’s generator first obtains a set of encoded features from the reference image. It then applies the warping field to the encoded features to move them into the target coordinate system. Finally, it decodes the warped features to obtain the prediction. This structure is common to a number of other generative models ; we focus on the FOMM  in this paper. Despite its promise, the FOMM falls short in a number of ways within the context of a video conferencing application. We elaborate on each of these aspects below.

The FOMM fails to reconstruct low-frequency detail (*e.g.,* face outline, location, and hand positions) in scenarios where the reference and the target image differ considerably. These differences are typically caused by major movement, pose shift, or a change in orientation. New background, lighting changes, and presence or absence of occlusions, also impact the reconstruction quality. Further, if the test video distribution differs from the training data set (differing amounts of torso, or facial zoom levels), the prediction produces unexpected artifacts. For instance in Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a>, the model is only able to produce a blurry outline of a face with no substantial features. The predicted faces in both rows have motion artifacts, and do not illustrate clear nose and mouth features. Further, the prediction in the bottom row of Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a> misses the hand altogether. This is because the subject in the reference frame does not possess a hand and faces a different direction compared to the target. This makes it hard for the motion estimation module to produce an accurate deformation that the generator can then leverage. In the top row of Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a>, the reference and target poses do not differ much, yet a blur is produced in the left cheek. We attribute this to the lack of images with substantial torso presence in the VoxCeleb  dataset on which the motion estimation module is trained. Such movements and torso presence are not rare over the course of a video-conferencing session. Poor prediction quality in such scenarios could cause serious disruptions to end-users expecting seamless video-conferencing experience.

Even in scenarios where the reference and the target are close to each other, and when the model is tested on data similar to the training data, the FOMM fails to reconstruct high-frequency content accurately. For instance, in Fig. <a href="#fig:prelim results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:prelim results">1</a>, the reference and target, both 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 frames drawn from the VoxCeleb  dataset, only vary slightly in their head tilt levels. Further, the lower teeth are visible in both the reference and the target. Yet, the model, trained to convergence on the same VoxCeleb dataset, fails to reconstruct the teeth accurately. This issue becomes more pronounced as the resolution is increased, and more high-frequency content is present in each frame. In such scenarios, the human eye is more sensitive to such missing or incorrect details. update figure maybe with microphone example

<figure id="fig:fom_diff_resolutions">

<figcaption>FOMM <span class="citation" data-cites="fom"></span> generator architecture that shows the size of intermediary features at higher resolutions. The standard architectures in (a) lead to a <span class="math inline">16×</span> increase in the bottleneck features at <span class="math inline">1024 × 1024</span> compared to <span class="math inline">256 × 256</span> pipeline. Instead, augmenting the encoding and decoding parts of the generator with two additional blocks (b) preserves the old feature dimensions at the bottleneck resulting in real-time computation on an NVIDIA V100 GPU even at <span class="math inline">1024 × 1024</span> resolution.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:detailed model diagram">
<embed src="figures/generator_architecture.pdf" style="width:83.0%" />
<figcaption>Gemino’s high-frequency-conditional super-resolution model at the receiving client. The model first obtains features from the low-resolution target. It combines the low-resolution reference and target frames to produce a warping field based on the motion between them. The warping field is applied on encoded features from a full-res reference frame. The low-resolution and full-resolution features are jointly decoded by the neural decoder to produce the prediction at the receiver. </figcaption>
</figure>

Lastly, many existing approaches  are evaluated on 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 images . However, typical video conferences are at least 720p, especially in the full-speaker view. While the convolutions in these models allow them to scale to larger resolutions with the same kernels, the inference times often exceed the real-time deadline (33ms per frame for 30 frames-per-second) at high resolutions. We observe this in Tab. <a href="#tab:prediction_diff_resolution" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:prediction_diff_resolution">[tab:prediction_diff_resolution]</a> which shows the inference time of the FOMM  on different GPU systems at different resolutions. This is unsurprising: running the FOMM unmodified at different resolutions performs the same number of operations per-pixel on 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 and 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 frames even though each pixel represents a smaller region of interest in the former case. With 16$`\times`$ more input pixels, the model’s encoded features are also larger. This suggests that we need to redesign neural codecs to operate at higher resolutions without significant compute overheads, particularly as we move towards 4K videos.

<figure id="fig:vpx resolutions">
<embed src="figures/baseline_resolution_bitrate_tradeoff.pdf" />
<figcaption>Compression achieved by VP8 at different resolutions. At lower resolutions such as 256x256, the video can be compressed with an SSIM of 0.9 with less than 100Kbps.</figcaption>
</figure>

Despite their promise, current neural approaches to video-conferencing fall short in several ways. First, existing methods are designed for low-resolutions such as 256x256. While these resolutions are convenient because of the presence of training data, standard codecs are very effective at such low-resolutions. For instance, as seen in Fig. <a href="#fig:vpx resolutions" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:vpx resolutions">6</a>, at lower resolutions such as $`256\times256`$, the bitrate consumed by the video is under 100Kbps to achieve an SSIM value of 0.9. Since a keypoint stream consumes at least 20-30Kbps, the benefits from a neural video conferencing approach is expected to be modest, and utmost 2-3$`\times`$. Yet, recent attempts to extend face-generative techniques to video-conferencing systems have only focused on lower resolution images such as 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 , which are from the 1080p videos typically used for video conferencing. While some prior approaches have attempted generation of larger resolution videos , they do not discuss the overheads of their approaches.

A natural approach would be to take existing models, which are convolutional by design, and apply them to larger resolutions. While these models can still operate on larger resolutions, the compute costs become prohibitively expensive (§<a href="#sec:design" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:design">3</a>). For instance, reusing the First-Order-Motion  Model (FOMM) designed for 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 images at 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 implies a $`4\times`$ increase in prediction time from $`30ms`$ to nearly $`120ms`$ per-frame on an NVIDIA V100 GPU. With this increase, the model is no longer operating in real time on 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 input. Approaches that rely on 3D keypoints  are computationally more expensive to both train and perform inference on, and this trend worsens as the resolution is increased.

Lastly, current approaches lack robustness to extreme poses, and new backgrounds, textures, or people that were not previously trained on. Models trained on large corpuses consisting of many individuals, such as the VoxCeleb  datasets, do not preserve fidelity to the individual in target frames. They often generate a vague blurred human outline, rather than the specific features of the individual in the frame §<a href="#sec:eval" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval">5</a>. Further, current designs for neural video-conferencing systems assume a single reference frame responsible for propagating texture information throughout the video duration. Such a design significantly hampers prediction quality particularly when the reference and target frames are far apart in pose (top row of Fig. <a href="#fig:prelim results" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:prelim results">1</a>). In such case, the motion estimation network is expected to produce an accurate large warping field when its design assumes small affine transformations in the neighborhood of each keypoint . Further, sending multiple reference frames over the course of a video duration isn’t prohibitively expensive especially since all orientations of the face can be representatively covered with 50–100 frames, and their transmission cost is amortized over the entire video call. In §<a href="#sec:design" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:design">3</a>, we build Gemino incrementally, targeting each of the above design challenges. **VLS:** look into NEMO work’s motivation section and maybe concretely mention numbers

# System Design

## Overview

Our goal is to design a robust neural compression system that reconstructs both low and high frequency content in the target frame with high fidelity even under extreme motion and variance across target frames. Ideally, such a system should also be able to operate at high resolution without significant compute overheads. Our prototype operates at 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 resolution.

Our key insight is that we need to go beyond the limited representation of movement that keypoints or facial landmarks alone provide. Fortunately, modern video codecs are very efficient in compressing low-resolution (LR) video frames. For instance, VPX compresses 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 resolution frames (8$`\times`$ downsampled in each dimension from our target resolution) using only 15 Kbps. Motivated by this observation and the fact that downsampled frames possess much more semantic information than keypoints, we design a model that performs *super-resolution conditioned on high-frequency textures* from a full-resolution reference frame. More specifically, our model resolves a downsampled frame at the receiver to its full resolution, aided by features derived from a full-resolution reference frame.

## Model Architecture

Fig. <a href="#fig:detailed model diagram" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:detailed model diagram">5</a> describes Gemino’s model architecture running at the receiver of a video conferencing session. We assume that the receiver has access to a single *high-resolution reference frame*, capturing what the speaker looks like in that particular session. It also receives a stream of *low-resolution target frames* that are compressed by a traditional video codec.  The receiver first takes the decompressed low-resolution (LR) target that it receives from the sender over the network and runs it through a single convolutional layer to produce LR features.  Next, the reference frame is downsampled and supplied, along with the (decompressed) LR target, to a motion estimation module that consists of a UNet .  Since the two frames typically differ in their axes alignment, the motion estimator uses the keypoints to output a “warping field” or a transformation to move the reference frame features into the target frame’s coordinates.  Meanwhile, the full-resolution reference frame is fed through a series of convolutional layers that encode it to extract high-resolution (HR) features.  The model applies the transformation produced by the motion estimator to the HR features to produce a set of warped (or rotated) HR features in the target frame’s coordinate system.

Once the warped and encoded features from both the LR and HR pipelines are obtained, the model combines them before decoding the features to synthesize the target image. Specifically,  the model uses three inputs to produce the final reconstruction:  the warped HR features,  the HR features prior to warping, and  the LR features. Each of these inputs on a feature-by-feature basis with three occlusion masks of the same dimension, produced by the motion estimator. These occlusion masks sum up to 1 and describe how to weigh different regions of the input features when reconstructing each region of target frame. For instance, mask maps to parts of the face or body that have moved in the reference and need to be regenerated in the target pose, mask maps to the regions that don’t move between the reference and target (*e.g.,* background), while mask maps to new regions (*e.g.,* hands) that are only visible in the LR frame.  Once multiplied with their respective masks, the combined input features are fed through convolutional layers in the decoding blocks that upsample them back into the target resolution. A more detailed description of the model with figures can be found in App. <a href="#app:model details" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:model details">8</a>.

A natural question is whether the high-resolution information from the HR reference frame is essential or if we can simply perform super-resolution on the LR input frame through a series of upsampling blocks. While the downsampled LR frame is great at conveying low-frequency details from the target frame, it possesses little high-frequency information. This often manifests in the predicted frames as a blur or lack of detail in clothing, hair, or facial features such as teeth or eye details. To synthesize frames that are faithful to both the low and high-frequency content in the target, it is important to combine super-resolution from the LR frame with features extracted from the HR reference frame (§<a href="#sec:eval_model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_model">5.3</a>). The former ensures that we good low-frequency fidelity, while the latter handles the high-frequency details. The last column of Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a> shows how much the reconstruction improves with our high-frequency-conditional super-resolution approach. Specifically, we are able to capture the hand movement in row 2, the head movement in row 1, and the large motion in row 3. Gemino also produces a sharper reconstruction of facial features and the high-frequency content in the grille in row 2.

Once we transmit downsampled frames from the sender to the receiver, an obvious approach would be to simply use a series of upsampling layers to resolve features from the downsampled frame back to its original resolution. However, while the downsampled frame is great at conveying low-frequency details from the target frame, it possesses very little high-frequency information. This makes it very hard for such a model to produce images with high-fidelity to the high-frequency content. This often manifests as a blur or lack of detail in clothing, hair, or facial features such as teeth or eye details. To design a neural compression system that is faithful to both the low and high-frequency content in the target image, we observe that it is important to combine both super-resolution from a downsampled version of the target frame as well as warped features from a high-resolution reference frame. The former ensures that we get the low-frequency details right, while the latter is responsible for high-frequency details in the target image.

Informed by this insight, we design a model designed to perform *conditional super-resolution* wherein a downsampled frame at the receiver is resolved to its full resolution conditioned on a set of encoded features from a full-resolution reference frame that are warped based on the motion between the reference and target images. Fig. <a href="#fig:detailed model diagram" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:detailed model diagram">5</a> describes our model in detail. The generative part of our model encodes features from the downsampled frame through a single convolutional layer. This is combined with encoded features from the high-resolution reference frame that are both warped and presented as is to the decoder. This allows the decoder to distinguish the high-frequency content from the reference frame that moves and does not move respectively in the target frame. To generate the warping itself, we use a pipeline similar to the FOMM  wherein we extract keypoints from the downsampled frame using a UNet style architecture , and then supply it to the motion estimation neural network. However, unlike the FOMM, since we have access to the downsampled frame also at the receiver, we supply the downsampled frame also as an input in addition to the keypoints themselves to the motion estimation module so that it can also benefit from the semantic information present in the downsampled frame. The motion estimation module also runs its inputs through a UNet  before generating a deformation and a set of masks that add up to 1 that inform the decoder how to combine its three pathways of information. We find that these three pathways of information and the use of the downsampled frame in the motion estimation neural net greatly improve the prediction fidelity (§<a href="#sec:eval_model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_model">5.3</a>). The last column of Fig. <a href="#fig:fom failures" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fom failures">3</a> shows how much the reconstruction improves with our conditional super-resolution approach. Specifically, we are able to capture the hand movement in row 2, head movement in row 1, and the large motion in row 3. Gemino also produces a much sharper reconstruction of facial features and the high-frequency content in the grille in row 2.

## Optimizations To Improve Fidelity

Our design decision to transmit low-resolution frames instead of keypoints is motivated by modern codecs’ ability  to efficiently compress videos at lower resolutions. Downsampled frames can be compressed at a wide range of bitrates depending on the resolution and quantization level. However, the LR video resolution determines the required upsampling factor. Note that different upsampling factors normally require different variants of the deep neural model (*e.g.,* different number of upsampling stages, different feature sizes, *etc.*). This means that for each target bitrate, we first need to choose a LR video resolution, and then train a model to reconstruct high-res frames from that resolution. We first create a reverse map from bitrate ranges to resolutions by profiling VPX codecs to identify the bitrate regime that can be achieved at each resolution. We use this map to select an appropriate resolution and codec for the LR video stream at each target bitrate. Tab. <a href="#tab:resolution_bitrate_regime" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:resolution_bitrate_regime">[tab:resolution_bitrate_regime]</a> shows the resolution and codec Gemino uses in each bitrate range. Once a resolution is chosen, we train the model to upsample *decompressed LR frames* (from the VPX codec) of that resolution to the desired output resolution. This results in separate models for each target bitrate regime, each optimized to learn the nature of frames (and artifacts) produced by the codec at that particular resolution and bitrate. Since each such model requires 30 hours of training time on a single A100 GPU, we show that it is prudent to downsample to the highest resolution compressible at a particular bitrate, and use the model trained with a target bitrate at the lowest end of the achievable bitrate range for that resolution (§<a href="#sec:eval_config" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_config">5.4</a>).

<figure id="fig:personalization vs generic 512">
<embed src="figures/personalized_vs_generic.pdf" />
<figcaption>Performance of a model trained on a generic corpus of 512<span class="math inline">×</span>512 videos compared to a personalized model fine-tuned on the specific person in the video. The personalized model better captures the eye gaze, dimples, and rim of the glasses.</figcaption>
</figure>

To improve the fidelity of our reconstructions, we explore training Gemino in two ways: *personalized* to each individual, and *generic*. To train the personalized model, we separate videos of each person into non-overlapping test and train data; the model is not exposed to the test videos, but learns a person’s facial features from training videos of that specific person. The generic model is trained on a corpus of videos consisting of many different people. Fig. <a href="#fig:personalization vs generic 512" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:personalization vs generic 512">7</a> visually compares these two approaches. The personalized model is better at reconstructing specific high-frequency details of the person, e.g., eye gaze (row 1), dimples (row 2), and the rim of the glasses (row 3), compared to the generic model. We envision the model in neural video conferencing systems to be personalized to each individual using a few hours of their video calls, and cached at the systems of receivers who frequently converse with them. An unoptimized (full-precision) checkpoint of the model’s 82M parameters is about a GB in size. However, we show that the model can be compressed in §<a href="#sec:eval_config" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_config">5.4</a>.

## Reducing Computational Overheads

As we scale up the desired output resolution, it is crucial to perform fewer operations per pixel to reduce the compute overheads. We carefully examine different parts of the model in Fig. <a href="#fig:detailed model diagram" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:detailed model diagram">5</a>, and design a multi-scale architecture where we separate those modules that require fine-grained detail from those that only need coarse-grained information. Specifically, the motion estimation module is responsible for obtaining high-level motion information from the model. Even as the input resolution is increased, this coarse information can be inferred from low-resolution frames which retain low-frequency details. Consequently, in Gemino, we operate the motion estimation module on low-resolution reference and target frames (64$`\times`$<!-- -->64). In contrast, the neural encoder and decoders are responsible for reconstructing high-frequency content and require fine-grained details from the high-resolution reference frame.

To further reduce computational overheads, we adjust the number of downsampling and upsampling blocks in the neural encoder and decoder based on the input resolution, keeping the size of the intermediate bottleneck tensor manageable. For example, for 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 input, we use 4 down/up-sampling blocks in the encoder and decoder (Fig. <a href="#fig:detailed model diagram" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:detailed model diagram">5</a>). So as to not lose information through the bottleneck, we equip the first two blocks with skip connections  that directly provide encoded features to the decoder. As seen in the third column of Tab. <a href="#tab:prediction_diff_resolution" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:prediction_diff_resolution">[tab:prediction_diff_resolution]</a>, our multi-scale architecture reduces the reconstruction time of the model by 2.75$`\times`$ on older Titan X and NVIDIA V100 GPUs, while allowing us to easily meet the real-time deadline on an NVIDIA A100 GPU.

While the multi-scale architecture achieves real-time inference on A100 GPU system, it still fails to meet the 30 fps requirement on older systems such as Titan X. To enable this, we optimize our model further through a suite of techniques aimed at lowering the compute overheads of large neural networks. Specifically, we focus on reducing the number of operations or Multiply-Add Cumulations (MACs) involved in the expensive decoding layers which are run on every frame. While a reduction in MACs does not always translate to reduction in latency on the targeted platform , it acts as a reasonable proxy for our case. We first replace the regular convolutional blocks in Gemino with depthwise separable convolutions (DSC) followed by a pointwise convolution , a commonly used architecture for mobile inference.

To decrease the model MACs even further without impacting its fidelity, we run NetAdapt , a neural-architecture search algorithm that iteratively prunes the number of channels layer-by-layer until the compute overheads fall below a target threshold. NetAdapt can directly optimize for latency on different platforms, but we instead use it to optimize the MACs to reduce the overheads of running separate architecture searches for each platform. NetAdapt achieves its MAC reduction in iterations, each of which targets a small decrease (*e.g.,* 3%) towards its target. In each iteration, NetAdapt prunes the layer of the model which decreases its MACs with the least loss in accuracy after “short-term finetuning” on a small subset of the data. The pruned model acts as the starting point for the next iteration, and this process continues until the model has been shrunk sufficiently. Finally, the model is “long-term fine-tuned” on the entire dataset to recover its lost accuracy.

Since Gemino uses personalized models, we adapt NetAdapt’s logic to suit Gemino’s training paradigm. We first apply NetAdapt on the generic Gemino model with short-term finetuning on the generic dataset. This is because neural architecture search is expensive to run, and we observe that the pruned architecture at the end of NetAdapt is the same for generic and personalized models. We finally long-term finetune the shrunk model in a personalized manner to better recover its accuracy (§<a href="#sec:eval_config" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_config">5.4</a>). These optimizations allow us to run inference on the Titan X GPU in 27 ms with barely any loss in visual quality (last column of Tab. <a href="#tab:prediction_diff_resolution" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:prediction_diff_resolution">[tab:prediction_diff_resolution]</a>) when upsampling 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 frames at 15 Kbps to 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024. Given that video conferencing applications tolerate latencies of up to 200 ms (5–6 frames) in their jitter buffers , we believe that the additional delay from generating the received frame will be negligible.

## Operational Flow

To train Gemino, we first obtain weights from a trained FOMM model on the entire VoxCeleb dataset  at 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 resolution. We choose the appropriate training data for the specific person we want to train a Gemino model for, and train from scratch the additional downsampling and upsampling layers in the HR pipeline as well as all layers in the LR pipeline, while fine-tuning the rest of the model for 30 epochs. We repeat this procedure for different LR frame resolutions and target bitrate regimes mention in Tab. <a href="#tab:resolution_bitrate_regime" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:resolution_bitrate_regime">[tab:resolution_bitrate_regime]</a>, and different people. In parallel, using the same procedure, we also train a generic version of the model on a larger corpus of people. Both models are replaced with depthwise-separable convolutions and optimized using NetAdapt  to produce the final model.

Once versions of the model have been trained and optimized for different LR resolutions and target bitrates, we simply use the appropriate model for the current target bitrate regime and the person on the video call. The sender and the receiver pre-negotiate the reference frame at the beginning of the video call. This model performs inference on a frame-by-frame basis in real-time to synthesize the video stream at the receiver. We detail our prototype implementation and WebRTC pipeline further in §<a href="#sec:impl" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:impl">4</a>.

# Implementation

<figure id="fig:software stack">
<embed src="figures/aiortc_pipeline.pdf" />
<figcaption>Neural video compression pipeline atop WebRTC <span class="citation" data-cites="webrtc"></span>. We use two RTP streams: A sparse reference stream that sporadically sends high-resolution reference frames, and a per-frame(PF) stream that is used on every frame. The PF stream sends downsampled frames of the highest resolution that the current bandwidth can support, and thus has separate VP8 compression modules for each resolution. The receiver decompresses the downsampled frames, and supplies them, along with the latest reference frame, to the neural network that reconstructs the target video. If bandwidth is high enough, the PF stream is used for full-resolution VP8 frames without synthesis.</figcaption>
</figure>

Our neural video conferencing solution uses WebRTC , an open-source framework that enables video and audio conferencing atop the real-time transport protocol (RTP) . Since we perform neural frame synthesis, we use a Python implementation of WebRTC called *aiortc*  that allows easy interfacing with PyTorch. Aiortc handles the initial signaling and the peer-to-peer connection setup. A typical video call has two streams (video and audio) that are multiplexed onto a single connection. The sender extracts raw frames from the display, and compresses the video and audio components separately using standard codecs like VPX , H.264/5 , Opus , *etc.*. The receiver decompresses the received data in both streams before synchronizing them and displaying each frame to the client.

We extend the standard WebRTC stack to use two distinct streams for video: a *per-frame stream* (PF stream) that transmits downsampled video (e.g. 64$`\times`$<!-- -->64 frames) *on every frame*, and a reference stream that transmits occasional but high-resolution *reference* frames that improve the synthesis fidelity. We anticipate using the reference stream extremely sparsely. For instance, in our implementation, we use the first frame of the video as the *only* reference frame. However, more reference frames may help recover high-frequency fidelity as it worsens when the reference and target frames drift apart. But, most low-frequency changes between the reference and the target can be communicated simply through the downsampled target in the PF stream[^3]. The receiver uses the per-frame information in the PF stream, with the reference information, to synthesize each high-resolution frame. Fig. <a href="#fig:software stack" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:software stack">8</a> illustrates the expanded WebRTC architecture to accommodate the Gemino design.

The PF stream is implemented as a new RTP-enabled stream on the same peer connection between the sender and the receiver. We downsample each input frame to the desired resolution at the sender and compress it using the appropriate VPX codec. The frame is decompressed at the receiver. The bitrate achieved is controlled by supplying a target bitrate to VPX. Our PF stream can support full-resolution video that is typical in most video conferencing applications, while also supporting a range of lower resolutions for the model to upsample from. To enable this flexibility, we design the PF stream to have multiple VPX encoder-decoder pairs, one for each resolution that it operates at. When the sender transmits a frame, it chooses an appropriate resolution and codec based on the target bitrate, and compresses the video at that resolution and target bitrate. The resolution information is embedded in the payload of the RTP packet carrying the frame data. When the receiver receives each RTP packet, it infers the resolution and sends it to the VPX decoder for that resolution. Once decompressed, the low-resolution frame is upsampled by Gemino to the appropriate full-resolution frame. If the PF stream consists of 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 frames, Gemino falls back onto the regular codec and stops using the reference stream. The reference stream is repurposed from the existing video stream.

. To enable neural frame synthesis, we define a wrapper that allows the *aiortc* pipeline to interface with the model. We reuse most of the pipeline from frame read at the sender to display at the receiver, except for introducing a downsampling module right after frame read, and a prediction function right before frame display. The wrapper is structured to perform format conversions and data movement from the AudioVisual  frames on the CPU that *aiortc* needs, to the PyTorch  tensors on the GPU required by the model. We initialize models separately for the sending and receiving clients. The wrapper also allows us to save (and periodically update) state at the sender and receiver which is useful for reducing the overheads from modules where we can reuse old computation (*e.g.,* run the encoder for high-resolution reference features only when the reference changes).

We optimize a number of other aspects of the *aiortc* pipeline. For instance, we move data between the CPU and GPU multiple times in each step of the pipeline. Batching these operations is difficult when maintaining low latency on each frame. However, to minimize PCIe overheads from repetitive data movement, we use *uint8* variables instead of *float*. We also keep reference frames and their encoded features stored as model state on the GPU. We pipeline as many operations as possible by running keypoint extraction, model reconstruction, and conversions between data formats in separate threads.

# Evaluation

We evaluate Gemino in a simulation environment and atop a WebRTC-based implementation. We describe our setup in §<a href="#sec:eval_setup" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_setup">5.1</a> and use it to compare existing baselines in §<a href="#sec:eval_overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_overall">5.2</a>. §<a href="#sec:eval_model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_model">5.3</a> motivates our model design, §<a href="#sec:eval_config" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_config">5.4</a> discusses the impact of having the codec in our training process, and §<a href="#sec:eval_adaptation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_adaptation">5.5</a> shows that Gemino closely matches a time-varying target bitrate.

## Setup

Since most widely used datasets are of low-resolution videos  and lack diversity in the extent of the torso or face-zoom level, we collected our own dataset comprising of videos of five Youtubers with publicly available HD (1920$`\times`$<!-- -->1080) videos. For each Youtuber, we curate a set of 20 distinct videos or URLs that differ in clothing, hairstyle, accessories, or background. The 20 videos of each Youtuber are separated into 15 training videos and 5 test videos. For each video, we manually record and trim the segments that consist of talking individuals; we ignore parts that pan to news segments or different clips. The segments are further split into 10s chunks to generate easily loadable videos for training, while the segments of the test video are combined to form a longer video. We also spatially crop each frame into our desired dimensions (typically 1024$`\times`$ 1024). based on the average location of the person across all frames of the video. Note that 720p and 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 frames have similar numbers of pixels. We strip the audio since our focus is on video synthesis. Tab. <a href="#tab:dataset_info" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:dataset_info">[tab:dataset_info]</a> in App. <a href="#app:training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:training">8.3</a> describes the details of the dataset. We do not own any of these videos, and we only use images of frames produced by our evaluation pipeline in this paper. We use the 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 dataset from NVIDIA  to train a generic model to illustrate the benefits of personalization. Our evaluation focuses on reconstructing a single front-facing person in a video call; Gemino can be extended to multiple speakers if there are application-level techniques to separate speakers into individual streams .

The main model we evaluate is our high-frequency conditional super-resolution model that consists of an upsampling module that takes in features from a low-resolution (LR) frame, and upsamples it to 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024. To provide the high-frequency details, it uses two pathways consisting of warped and unwarped features from the high-resolution (HR) reference image (Fig. <a href="#fig:detailed model diagram" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:detailed model diagram">5</a>). We use the first frame of the video as the *sole reference* image for the entire test duration. The warping field is produced by a motion estimation network that uses the first-order approximation near 10 keypoints . Our multi-scale architecture runs motion estimation always at 64$`\times`$<!-- -->64 irrespective of the input video resolution. The neural encoder (for the HR features) and decoder (for both LR and HR features) consist of four down and upsample blocks. The discriminator operates at multiple scales and uses spectral normalization  for stability. Layers of our model that are identical in dimensions to those from the FOMM are initialized from a public FOMM checkpoint trained on the VoxCeleb dataset , and fine-tuned on a per-person basis. The remaining layers are randomly initialized and trained on a per-person basis over 30 epochs. We fine-tune the FOMM baseline also in the same personalized manner. We use Adam optimizer  to update the model weights with a learning rate of 0.0002, and first and second momentum decay rates of 0.5 and 0.999. We use equally weighted multi-scale VGG perceptual loss , a feature-matching loss , and a pixel-wise loss. We also use an adversarial loss  with one-tenth the weight of remaining losses. The keypoints use an equivariance loss similar to the FOMM . We train our models to reconstruct from decompressed VPX frames corresponding to the low-resolution target frame so that the model learns to correct any artifacts produced by VPX.

We evaluate our neural compression system in a simulation environment where frames are read from a video, downsampled (if needed) for the low-resolution PF stream, compressed using VPX’s chromium codec , and passed to the model (or other baselines) to synthesize the target frame. Note that the FOMM  uses keypoints and four “Jacobian” values around each keypoint for producing its warping, and transmits them over the network. We design a new codec for the keypoint data that achieves nearly lossless compression and a bitrate of about 30 Kbps. For VPX, we compress and decompress the full-resolution frame at different target bitrates, and measure the difference in visual quality between the output and the original frame.

To obtain end-to-end latency measurements and to demonstrate Gemino’s adaptability to different target bitrates, (§<a href="#sec:eval_adaptation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_adaptation">5.5</a>), we use our *aiortc*  implementation. A sending process reads video from a file frame-by-frame and transmits it to a receiving process that records each received frame. The two processes, running on the same server, use the ICE signaling  mechanism to establish a peer-to-peer connection over a UNIX socket, which then supports video frame transmission using the Real-Transport Protocol (RTP). We timestamp each frame as it is sent and received, and save the sent and received frames in their uncompressed forms to compute latency and visual metrics. We also log RTP packet sizes to compute the bitrate.

To quantify the aesthetics of the generated video, we use standard visual metrics such as PSNR (peak signal-to-noise ratio), SSIM (structural similarity index) in decibels , and LPIPS (learned perceptual image patch similarity) . For PSNR and SSIM, higher is better; while for LPIPS, lower is better. We observe that differences in LPIPS are more reflective of how natural the synthesized frame feels and use that as our main comparison metric ( §<a href="#sec:app:metrics" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:app:metrics">9.2</a>); we also show visual strips where appropriate. We report the bitrate consumed to achieve a particular visual quality by measuring the total data transferred (size of compressed frames or RTP packet sizes) over the duration of the video, and dividing it by the duration itself. To measure the end-to-end latency, we record the time at which the frame is read from the disk at the sender as well as the time at which prediction completes at the receiver. We report the difference between these two timestamps as our per-frame latency metric. We also report the inference time per frame when running the trained model in simulation; this does not capture the overheads of data conversion or movement in an end-to-end pipeline. This inference time needs to be $`<33`$ms to maintain a 30fps video call. We run all our experiments for the entire duration of each test video in our dataset (Tab. <a href="#tab:dataset_info" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:dataset_info">[tab:dataset_info]</a>), and report the average over all frames for each metric.

We obtain the bitrate for *VP8*, the default codec in its Chromium settings  that comes with the *aiortc* codebase. We also implement and evaluate VP9 in the same setup. To evaluate the benefits of using a neural approach to video conferencing, particularly at lower bitrates, we compare a few different models: (1) *FOMM* , a keypoint-based model for face animation, (2) our approach, Gemino, (3) state-of-the-art super-resolution model based on *SwinIR* , and (4) *bicubic upsampling*  applied to the low-resolution VPX target frame. All of the compared models generate 1024$`\times`$ 1024 frames except for the generic model that uses NVIDIA’s 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 corpus .

<figure id="fig:main_comparison" data-latex-placement="!t">

<figcaption>Rate-distortion curve for Gemino compared with existing baselines. VP8 and VP9 require <span class="math inline">∼</span>5<span class="math inline">×</span> and <span class="math inline">∼</span>3<span class="math inline">×</span> the bitrate consumed by Gemino to achieve comparable LPIPS. At lower bitrates, Gemino outperforms other approaches that upsample low-resolution video frames. Gemino’s benefits become prominent as the bitrate regime is lowered.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:main_comparison_cdf" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="figures/main_experiment_with_vp9_after_recalibrating_per_frame_cdf_3plots_lpips.pdf" />
<figcaption>CDF of reconstruction quality across all video frames as that shows that, as we move from higher bitrates to lower, the improvement from Gemino relative to Bicubic, particularly over VP9, becomes more pronounced.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:main_comparison_strip" data-latex-placement="!t">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="figures/main_comparison_strip.pdf" />
</div>
<div class="minipage">
<p><span id="fig:main_comparison_strip" data-label="fig:main_comparison_strip"></span></p>
</div>
<figcaption>Visual comparison across low-bitrate baselines. All but FOMM upsample a 256<span class="math inline">×</span>256 frame at 45 Kbps. Gemino’s reconstructions contain a smoother output than the blocky artifacts observed with Bicubic and SwinIR. The FOMM completely fails when the reference and the target differ considerably in rows 1 and 2.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Overall Bitrate vs. Quality Tradeoff

To quantify the improvements of our neural compression system, we first compare Gemino with VP8 and VP9 in their chromium configuration . Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison">9</a> shows the rate-distortion curve for all schemes. For VPX, we alter the target bitrate alone for full-resolution (1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024) frames in the PF stream. For Gemino, bicubic, and SwinIR, we vary the resolution and target bitrate of the low-resolution (LR) frame in the per-frame(PF) stream. For each point on the rate-distortion curve for Gemino, we train a personalized model to reconstruct full-resolution frames from LR frames encoded at the highest resolution supported by that target bitrate. We motivate using the codec in training and choosing the resolution in §<a href="#sec:eval_config" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_config">5.4</a>. The PF stream is compressed with VPX’s Chromium settings at the target bitrate for its resolution. We configure Gemino to choose the base codec (VP8 or VP9) that has the better visual quality for a given target bitrate. We plot the resulting bitrate and visual metrics averaged across all 25 test videos’ (5 speakers; 5 videos each) frames. Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison_full" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison_full">[fig:main_comparison_full]</a> shows that VP8 operates in a different bitrate regime than all other schemes. VP9 improves the dynamic range to about 130 Kbps, but still can’t compress below that. Both VPX codecs operate on full-resolution frames, which cannot be compressed as efficiently as LR frames by the codec in its real-time mode. We observe that VP8 and VP9 consume 523 Kbps and 230 Kbps respectively to achieve an LPIPS of 0.21. In contrast, our approach is able to achieve the same visual quality with only 105 Kbps, providing nearly 5$`\times`$ and 2.2$`\times`$ in improvement over VP8 and VP9 respectively.

However, since our goal is to enable video conferencing in bitrate regimes where current codecs fail, we focus on bitrates $`<`$ 200 Kbps in Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison_low_bitrate" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison_low_bitrate">[fig:main_comparison_low_bitrate]</a>. Gemino uses VP8 at 15 Kbps and 45 Kbps but VP9 at higher bitrates; VP8 and VP9 do not differ much at lower bitrates, but VP9 allows even 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 to be compressed to 75 Kbps. Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison_low_bitrate" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison_low_bitrate">[fig:main_comparison_low_bitrate]</a> suggests that while LPIPS always shows considerable variation across schemes, small differences (1–2 dB) in PSNR and SSIM start manifesting only at lower bitrates. Specifically, Gemino achieves over 1 dB better SSIM and PSNR, and 0.08 lesser LPIPS than Bicubic around 50 Kbps. To map these metrics to improvements in visual quality, we show some snippets in Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison_strip" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison_strip">11</a> and enlarged frames (with per-frame metrics) in §<a href="#sec:app:metrics" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:app:metrics">9.2</a>. Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison_strip" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison_strip">11</a> shows that compared to Gemino, reconstructions from bicubic have more block-based artifacts in the face, and the FOMM misses parts of the frame (row 4) or distorts the face. SwinIR, a super-resolution model, performs worse than bicubic. We suspect this is because SwinIR is not specifically trained on faces, and is also oblivious to artifacts from the codec that it encounters in our video conferencing pipeline. To account for this, we evaluate a simple upsampling model personalized on faces in §<a href="#sec:eval_model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_model">5.3</a>.

We also show CDFs of the visual quality in LPIPS across all frames in our corpus in Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison_cdf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison_cdf">10</a> at 15 Kbps, 45 Kbps, 75 Kbps and 105 Kbps. The same CDFs for PSNR and SSIM can be found in §<a href="#sec:app:low bitrate" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:app:low bitrate">9.1</a>. At each target bitrate, we use the largest resolution supported by the underlying video codec. The CDFs show that Gemino’s reconstructions are robust to variations across frames and orientation changes over the course of a video. Gemino outperforms all other baselines across all frames and metrics. Specifically, its synthesized frames at 45 Kbps are better than FOMM by 0.05–0.1. It also outperforms Bicubic and SwinIR by 0.05 and 0.1 in LPIPS at the median and tail respectively. As we move from higher bitrates to lower, we observe that the improvement from Gemino relative to Bicubic, particularly over VP9, becomes more pronounced. While the gap in LPIPS at the median between Bicubic (VP9) and Gemino is less than 0.05 at 105 Kbps, it increases to nearly 0.2 at 15 Kbps. Gemino increases the end-to-end frame latency to $`\sim`$<!-- -->87 ms, from VPX’s 47 ms. However, our carefully pipelined operations are optimized to enable a throughput of 30 fps.[^4]

## Model Design

<figure id="fig:model_ablation_strip" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="figures/model_ablation_strip.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption>Visual comparison across different model architectures. Compared to Gemino, Pure upsampling misses the high-frequency details of the microphone (row 2) and lends block-based artifacts on the face (row 3).</figcaption>
</figure>

To understand the impact of our model design, we compare Gemino to a *pure upsampling* approach from the LR target features with no pathways from an HR reference frame (only in Fig. <a href="#fig:detailed model diagram" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:detailed model diagram">5</a>) at decompressing VP8 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 frames at 15 Kbps to its full 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 resolution. Tab. <a href="#tab:model_architecture_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:model_architecture_comparison">[tab:model_architecture_comparison]</a> reports the average visual quality while Fig. <a href="#fig:model_ablation_cdf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model_ablation_cdf">13</a> shows a CDF of performance across all frames and videos. Gemino outperforms pure upsampling on average by 0.4 dB on SSIM and 0.04 on LPIPS. This is also visible in rows 2 and 3 of Fig. <a href="#fig:model_ablation_strip" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model_ablation_strip">12</a> where the pure upsampling approach misses the high-frequency details of the microphone grille and lends blocky artifacts to the face respectively. This manifests as a 0.05 difference in the LPIPS of the median frame reconstruction and a nearly 0.1 difference between Gemino and Pure Upsampling at the tail in Fig. <a href="#fig:model_ablation_cdf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model_ablation_cdf">13</a>. Since one of our goals is to have a robust neural compression system that has good reconstruction quality across a wide variety of frames, this difference at the tail across approaches is particularly salient. On the other hand, Gemino synthesizes the mic better, and has fewer blocky artifacts on the face.

<figure id="fig:model_ablation_cdf">
<embed src="figures/model_ablation_combined_videos_frames_cdf.pdf" style="width:77.0%" />
<figcaption>CDF of reconstruction quality of different model architectures across frames and videos in our test corpus. Gemino outperforms pure upsampling by nearly 0.05 in LPIPS at the median of both frames and videos. It also outperforms the approach that relies on only warped HR, and the RGB-based warping across most frames in the corpus.</figcaption>
</figure>

To quantify the impact of personalization, we compare two versions of Gemino and Pure Upsampling: a *generic model* trained on a large corpus of 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 videos  of different people and a personalized model fine-tuned on videos of only a specific person. We compare the visual metrics averaged across all videos of all people when synthesized from a single generic model against the case when each person’s videos are synthesized from their specific model. All models upsample 64$`\times`$<!-- -->64 LR frames (without codec compression) to 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512. Fig. <a href="#fig:personalization vs generic 512" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:personalization vs generic 512">7</a> visually shows that the personalized Gemino model reconstructs the details of the face (row 1), dimples (row 2) and rim of the glasses (row 3) better but Tab. <a href="#tab:personalization" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:personalization">[tab:personalization]</a> shows that personalization provides limited benefits for Gemino(PSNR and SSIM improvements of 1.1 dB and 0.56 dB). However, personalization provides more pronounced benefits of nearly 1.5 dB in SSIM and PSNR, and 0.04 in LPIPS for the Pure Upsampling architecture. This suggests that the benefits from personalization are most notable when the underlying model architecture itself is limited in its representational power: the personalized pure upsampling architecture is able to encode high-frequency information in its weights when trained in a personalized manner, while it has no pathways to obtain that information in a generic model. It also illustrates that Gemino is more robust; it operates better than pure upsampling in the harder settings of a generic model and extreme upsampling from a 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 frame compressed to 15 Kbps (Fig. <a href="#fig:model_ablation_cdf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model_ablation_cdf">13</a>).

## Operational Considerations

Tab. <a href="#tab:compute_optimization" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:compute_optimization">[tab:compute_optimization]</a> explores the accuracy *vs.* compute tradeoffs of different models at 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 resolution with and without personalization as measured on different GPU systems with the various optimizations described in §<a href="#sec:system optimization compute" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:system optimization compute">3.4</a>. We focus on optimizing the decoding layers (bottleneck and up-sampling) of the generator ( Fig. <a href="#fig:neural encoder decoder" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:neural encoder decoder">17</a>) since they are the most compute intensive layers, and are also run on every received frame. The accuracy is reported in the form of the average LPIPS  across all frames of our corpus. We observe that DSC reduces the decoder to 11% of its original MACs. While this gives limited improvements on large GPU systems, it improves the inference time on Jetson TX2, an embedded AI device, by 1.84$`\times`$. Running NetAdapt further reduces the inference time to 87 ms at 1.5% of the model MACs on the TX2. The NVIDIA compiler on the Titan X GPU and the Jetson TX2 is not optimized for DSC ; this can be improved with a TVM compiler stack  and optimized engines such as TensorRT . However, running NetAdapt produces a real-time model for Titan X even at 10% of the original model MACs. As expected though, there is a loss of accuracy as the models become smaller. This loss is negligible in moving from the full model MACs to 10%, particularly when personalizing, but is more significant at 1.5%. The trend with personalization is expected since smaller models do not generalize well with their limited capacity, however it does not help if the optimizations are extreme. This illustrates that there is a sweet spot (such as decreasing MACs to 10%) wherein the gains from decreased compute outweigh the loss (or lack thereof) in accuracy.

Gemino is designed flexibly to work with LR frames of any size (64$`\times`$<!-- -->64, 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128, 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256, 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512) to resolve them to 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 frames, and to fall back to VPX at full resolution if it can be supported. VP8 and VP9 achieve different bitrate ranges at every resolution by varying how the video is quantized. For instance, on our corpus, we observe that 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 frames can be compressed with VP8 in the 45 Kbps–180 Kbps range, but VP9 can compress even 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 frames from 75 Kbps onwards. These bitrate ranges often overlap partially across resolutions. This begs the question: given a target bitrate, what resolution and codec should the model use to achieve the best quality? To answer this, we compare the synthesis quality with Gemino atop VP8 from three PF resolutions, all at 45 Kbps in Tab. <a href="#tab:resolution_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:resolution_comparison">[tab:resolution_comparison]</a>. Upsampling 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 frames, even though they have been compressed more to achieve the same bitrate, gives a nearly 4 dB improvement in PSNR, more than 2 dB improvement in SSIM, and a 0.03 improvement in LPIPS, over upsampling lower resolution frames. This is because the extent of super-resolution that the model performs decreases dramatically at higher starting resolutions. This suggests that for any given bitrate budget, we should start with the highest resolution frames that the PF stream supports at that bitrate, even at the cost of more quantization. This also means that if VP9 can compress higher resolution frames than VP8 at the same target bitrate, we should pick VP9. Tab. <a href="#tab:resolution_bitrate_regime" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:resolution_bitrate_regime">[tab:resolution_bitrate_regime]</a> shows the resolution and codec we choose for different target bitrate ranges in our implementation.

A key insight in the design of Gemino is that we need to design the neural compression pipeline to leverage the latest developments in codec design. One way to do so is to allow the model to see decompressed frames at the chosen bitrate and PF resolution during the training process so that it learns the artifacts produced by the codec. This allows us to get extremely low bitrates for LR frames (which often causes color shifts or other artifacts) while maintaining good visual quality. To evaluate the benefit of this approach, we compare five training regimes for Gemino when upsampling 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 video to 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024: (1) no codec, (2) VP8 frames at 15 Kbps, (3) VP8 frames at 45 Kbps, (4) VP8 frames at 75 Kbps, (5) VP8 frames at a bitrate uniformly sampled from 15 Kbps to 75 Kbps. We evaluate all five models at upsampling decompressed frames at 15 Kbps, 45 Kbps, and 75 Kbps.

Tab. <a href="#tab:encoder_effect" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:encoder_effect">[tab:encoder_effect]</a> shows the LPIPS achieved by all the models in each reconstruction regime. All models trained on decompressed frames perform better than the model trained without the codec. Further, the model trained at the lowest bitrate (15 Kbps) performs the best even when provided decompressed frames at a higher bitrate at test time because it has learned the most challenging Super-Resolution task from the worst LR frames, and performs well even with easier instances or higher bitrate frames. This suggests that we only need to train one personalized model per PF resolution at the lowest bitrate supported by a resolution, and then we can reuse it across the entire bitrate range that the PF resolution can support.

## Adaptation to Network Conditions

To understand the adaptability of Gemino, we explore how it responds to changes in the target bitrate over the course of a video. We remove any conflating effects from bandwidth prediction by directly supplying the target bitrate as a decreasing function of time to both Gemino and the VP8 codec. Gemino uses only VP8 through all bitrates for a fair comparison. Fig. <a href="#fig:adaptation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:adaptation">14</a> shows (in black) the target bitrate, along with the achieved bitrates of both schemes, and the associated perceptual quality  for a single video over the course of 220s of video-time[^5]. We observe that initially (first 120s), at high target bitrates, Gemino and VP8 perform very similarly because they are both transmitting just VP8 compressed frames at full (1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024) resolution. Once VP8 has hit its minimum achievable bitrate of $`\sim`$<!-- -->550 Kbps (after 120s), there is nothing more it can do, and it stops responding to the input target bitrate. However, Gemino continues to lower its PF stream resolution and/or bitrate in small steps all the way to the lowest target bitrate of 20 Kbps. Since Gemino is only using VP8 here, it switches to 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 at 550 Kbps, 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 at 180 Kbps, and 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128 at 30 Kbps. This design choice might cause abrupt shifts in quality around the transition points between resolutions. However, Gemino prioritizes responsiveness to the target bitrate over the hysteresis that classical encoders experience which, in turn, leads to packet losses due to overshooting and glitches. As the resolution of the PF stream decreases, as expected, the perceptual quality of Gemino worsens but is still better than VP8’s visual quality. This shows that Gemino can adapt well to bandwidth variations, though we leave the design of a transport and adaptation layer that provides fast and accurate feedback to Gemino for future work.

<figure id="fig:adaptation" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="figures/adaptation_1mbps_full_perfect_estimator.pdf" style="width:75.0%" />
<figcaption>Gemino’s ability to adapt to a time-varying target bitrate. As the target bitrate reduces, Gemino gradually lowers its PF stream resolution trading off more upsampling and less quality (increased LPIPS) for a reduction in achieved bitrate. VP8, in contrast, lowers the bitrate initially, but once at its minimum quality, it stops responding to the target bitrate.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Limitations and Future Work

While Gemino greatly expands the operating regime for video conferencing to very low bitrates, it incurs significant overheads in the form of training costs for codec-in-the-loop training and personalization. It compresses better than VPX, but the encoding and decoding processes are quite a bit slower than VPX, and not as widely supported on devices without access to some graphical processing engine. However, we believe that device improvements year on year are trending in a favorable direction, particularly with the emergence of optimized runtimes and hardware for running machine learning workloads on both Apple and Android devices . Further, NetAdapt  and layer-by-layer pruning is only one technique amongst a large suite of model optimization approaches. We believe that with more targeted optimizations for particular devices, we can do better. Such optimizations become more salient when operating on higher-resolution video (*e.g.,* 4K, UltraHD) and in higher bandwidth regimes ($`\sim`$ 5 Mbps). We leave an exploration of such optimizations to future work.

Gemino, though trained on random pairs of reference and target frames, always uses the first frame of the test video as its reference frame. The reconstruction fidelity can be improved by using reference frames close to each target frame. However, sending more frequent reference frames incurs very high bitrate costs due to their high resolution. We leave to future work a more thorough investigation of reference frame selection mechanisms that weigh these tradeoffs to squeeze the maximum accuracy for a given compression level.

# Conclusion

This paper proposes Gemino, a neural video compression scheme for video conferencing using a new high-frequency-conditional super-resolution model. Our model combines the benefits of low-frequency reconstruction from a low-resolution target, and high-frequency reconstruction from a high-resolution reference. Our novel multi-scale architecture and personalized training synthesize good quality videos at high resolution across many scenarios. The adaptability of the compression scheme to different points on a rate-distortion curve opens up new avenues to co-design the application and transport layers for better quality video calls. However, while neural compression shows promise in enabling very low bitrate video calls, it also raises important ethical considerations about the bias that training data can introduce on the usefulness of such a technique to different segments of the human population. We believe that our personalized approach alleviates some of these concerns, but does not eliminate them entirely. <span id="beforerefs" label="beforerefs"></span>

# Acknowledgments

We thank our shepherd, Arpit Gupta, and our anonymous NSDI reviewers for their feedback. This work was supported by GIST, seed grants from the MIT Nano NCSOFT program and Zoom Video Communications, and NSF awards 2105819, 1751009 and 1910676.

# Model Details

In the following subsections, we detail the structure of the motion estimator that produces the warping field for Gemino and the neural encoder-decoder pair that produce the prediction. We also describe additional details about the training procedure.

## Motion Estimator

The keypoint detector and the motion estimator use identical UNet structures (Fig. <a href="#fig:kp detector" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:kp detector">15</a> and Fig. <a href="#fig:motion estimator" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:motion estimator">16</a>) to extract features from their respective inputs before they are post-processed. In both cases, the UNet consists of five up and downsampling blocks each. Each downsampling block consists of a 2D convolutional layer , a batch normalization layer , a Rectified Linear Unit Non-linearity (ReLU) layer , and a pooling layer that downsamples by 2$`\times`$ in each dimension. The batch normalization helps normalize inputs and outputs across layers, while the ReLU layer helps speed up training. Each upsampling block first performs a 2$`\times`$ interpolation, followed by a convolutional layer, a batch normalization layer, and a ReLU layer. Thus, every downsampling layer reduces the spatial dimensions of the input but instead extracts features in a third “channel” or “depth” dimension by doubling the third dimension. On the other hand, every upsampling layer doubles in each spatial dimension, while halving the number of features in the depth dimension. In our implementation, the UNet structure always produces 64 features after its first encoder downsampling layer, and doubles from there on. The reverse happens with the decoder ending with 64 features after its last layer. Since the UNet structure operates on low-resolution input (as part of the keypoint detector and motion estimator), its kernel size is set to 3$`\times`$<!-- -->3 to capture reasonably sized fields of interest.

<figure id="fig:kp detector">
<embed src="figures/keypoint_detector.pdf" />
<figcaption>Keypoint Detector used as a precursor for computing the warping field between the reference and target images. Low-resolution versions of both frames are supplied to a UNet architecture <span class="citation" data-cites="unet"></span>, and then put through convolutional layers to generate keypoint locations and four “Jacobian” values in the neighborhood of each keypoint.</figcaption>
</figure>

To obtain the warping field between the reference frame and the target, Gemino first uses a keypoint detector to locate key facial landmarks. It then uses a first-order approximation in the neighborhood of these keypoints similar to the FOMM . To extract keypoints, we first downsample the input image to 64$`\times`$<!-- -->64, and then feed it into the UNet structure described above in its RGB space itself. The UNet structure produces a set of output features from its decoder, which are then put through two separate pipelines to extract the keypoint locations and the “Jacobians.” The keypoint locations are extracted via a single 7$`\times`$<!-- -->7 convolutional layer, which is then put through a softmax to extract probabilities for keypoint presence at each spatial location. This is then converted to actual keypoint locations by performing a weighted average of these probabilities across the entire spatial grid. Note that this process is replicated 10 times by having 10 separate channels to extract 10 keypoints. The Jacobians are simply four floating point numbers that are used to approximate the movement (derivatives) in the neighborhood of each keypoint. This is used for the first-order approximation when computing the motion around each keypoint. To generate these Jacobians, the output from the UNet is simply put through a single 7x7 convolutional layer. Fig. <a href="#fig:kp detector" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:kp detector">15</a> describes this architecture. Note that both the reference and the target images are fed to this pipeline independently to generate two separate sets of reference and target keypoints and Jacobians.

<figure id="fig:motion estimator" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/dense_motion_network.pdf" />
<figcaption>Gemino’s motion estimation module that takes as input reference and target keypoints, along with a low-resolution reference and target frames, and produces a warping field and occlusion masks. The warping field helps the generator move encoded features from a full-resolution reference frame into the target frame’s coordinate space, while the occlusion masks inform the decoder how to combine information from the low-resolution target frame with high-resolution (warped and unwarped) features from the reference frame.</figcaption>
</figure>

Fig. <a href="#fig:motion estimator" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:motion estimator">16</a> describes the working of the motion estimator in Gemino’s design in detail. First, the motion estimator creates Gaussian *heatmaps* corresponding to the keypoint locations from both the reference and the target frames. It subtracts the two on a per-keypoint basis to generate the difference between the two frames’ keypoints. It adds a separate heatmap consisting of zeros to denote the fact that the background is identical in the two frames. The motion estimator then generates *sparse motion* vectors or motion vectors in the neighborhood of each keypoint using the first-order Taylor series approximation  and the Jacobian values from the keypoint detector. These motion vectors (along with an identity for the background) are applied to the low-resolution reference frame to obtain a set of *deformed references*. This effectively generates 11 heatmaps (10 keypoints+ 1 for background), and 11 different RGB (3 channels) deformed references. The 44 resulting channels are provided as input along with 3 RGB features from the low-resolution target image to another replica of the UNet structure described above. This UNet’s decoder also outputs a set of predicted features based on all the provided 47 input features.

The predicted features are put through three separate 7$`\times`$<!-- -->7 convolutional layer followed by Sigmoid layers and a Softmax layer to produce *three occlusion masks*. Each occlusion mask is later used in the decoding pipeline to convey how to combine information from three pathways: the warped high-resolution features, the non-warped high-resolution features, and the low-resolution features to generate the prediction. We use a Softmax layer to enforce that the sum of these three occlusion masks is 1 at every spatial location so that they do not compete in later parts of the decoding pipeline. Intuitively, this forces each pixel to be generated from one out of the three pathways. If a feature represents a part of the frame that has moved between the reference and the target frames, reconstruction relies on the HR warped pathway, while if it represents a part of the frame that has not moved, it relies on the non-warped HR pathway. Regions that are significantly different between the reference and the target use the LR features instead.

The predicted features are also fed into a single 7$`\times`$<!-- -->7 convolutional layer followed by a Softmax to generate a *deformation mask* that reflects how to combine the sparse motion vectors previously obtained in the neighborhood of each location. The Softmax ensures that across every spatial location, different vectors are weighted appropriately to sum up to 1 finally. This deformation mask is applied to the sparse motion vectors to obtain the final warping field.

<figure id="fig:neural encoder decoder" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/generator_architecture_detailed.pdf" />
<figcaption>Gemino’s encoder-decoder pair that is responsible for synthesizing the prediction. The encoder runs the high-resolution reference image through a series of downsampling layers to produce encoded features. A copy of these encoded HR features is warped, and both the warped and non-warped features are refined through a sequence of residual blocks. Meanwhile, a convolutional layer extracts low-resolution features from a low-resolution target. The three sets of features are combined based on occlusion masks from the motion estimator before they are decoded to result in the final prediction.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Image Synthesis

Fig. <a href="#fig:neural encoder decoder" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:neural encoder decoder">17</a> describes the generative parts of Gemino design in more detail. First, the low-resolution target frames are put through a single 7$`\times7`$ convolutional layer to produce low-resolution (LR) features to be used later during decoding. The high-resolution reference RGB frame is also fed through a single 7$`\times7`$ convolutional layer to produce 32 high-resolution (HR) features with the same spatial dimensions before it is fed to the neural encoder. The neural encoder consists of four downsample blocks, each of which has the same structure as the downsample blocks in our UNet structure in the keypoint detector (Fig. <a href="#fig:kp detector" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:kp detector">15</a>). The four blocks ensure that we start at full-resolution (1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 frames) with 32 features and end up with 256 separate 64$`\times`$<!-- -->64 encoded HR features at the bottleneck. However, unlike the UNet, not all blocks in the neural encoder are equipped with skip connections. Specifically, only the first two have skip connections to the corresponding last two decoder blocks. The decoder also consists of upsampling blocks with the same composition as the UNet’s downsampling blocks. Prior to decoding, a copy of the HR features are warped using the warping field from the motion estimator (). The warped HR features and the unwarped features () are fed through five Residual Blocks  that refine them and also help prevent diminishing gradients during training. Each residual block consists of batch normalization, ReLU, and convolutional layers. The refined HR features, along with the LR features, and appropriate skip connections are combined using occlusion masks obtained from the motion estimator. Once combined, all three sets of features are fed through decoder’s upsampling blocks to spatial dimensions of 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 frames with 32 features. This output is fed through a final 7$`\times`$<!-- -->7 convolutional layer to bring it back to its RGB space as the prediction.

## Training Details

To train our model, we use equally weighted (with a weight 10) multi-scale VGG perceptual loss , a feature-matching loss , and an L1 pixelwise loss. The multi-scale VGG loss and feature matching losses operate at scales of 1, 0.5, 0.25, and 0.125 of the image size. All of these scales have equal loss weights. We also use an adversarial loss  with a weight of one (one-tenth of the other losses). The keypoints use an equivariance loss similar to the FOMM . Our keypoint detector is unchanged relative to the FOMM, and so we reuse a trained checkpoint on the VoxCeleb dataset , but fine-tune it on a per-person basis. For other layers, we adopt a simple strategy: if the dimensions match the equivalent layers in the FOMM (*e.g.,* encoder layers, residual layers), we initialize them based on a FOMM checkpoint, and if the dimensions do not match, they are initialized randomly. All models are personalized (either trained from scratch or fine-tuned if the layers are initialized to FOMM checkpoints). All models for 1024$`\times`$<!-- -->1024 output resolution were trained with a batch size of 2 on NVIDIA A100 GPUs while models for 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 output resolution were trained with a batch size of 2 on NVIDIA V100 GPUs. The details of the dataset we curate is shown in Tab. <a href="#tab:dataset_info" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:dataset_info">[tab:dataset_info]</a> As discussed earlier, models are trained on decompressed VPX frames at different bitrates. To support this, we encode individual frames at the target bitrate during train-time *after* they are sampled from the dataset. Since we encode individual frames, this only results in keyframes at train-time, but these frames are still representative of what compressed video frames more generally look like at that bitrate.

# Extended Evaluation

## Low-bitrate Regime Comparisons

<figure id="fig:main_cdf_psnr_ssim" data-latex-placement="t">

<figcaption>CDF of PSNR and SSIM achieved by different schemes on all frames in low-bitrate regimes. The differences between Gemino and other approaches becomes more pronounced in lower-bitrate regimes.</figcaption>
</figure>

We plot a CDF of the visual quality in the context of PSNR and SSIM across all frames in our corpus in Fig. <a href="#fig:main_cdf_psnr_ssim" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_cdf_psnr_ssim">18</a> at 15 Kbps, 45 Kbps, 75 Kbps and 105 Kbps. At each target bitrate, we use the largest resolution supported by the underlying video codec. Gemino uses VP8 at 15 Kbps and 45 Kbps but VP9 at higher bitrates; VP8 and VP9 do not differ much at lower bitrates, but VP9 allows 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512 to be compressed all the way to 75 Kbps while VP8 cannot. Since our results in §<a href="#sec:eval_config" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:eval_config">5.4</a> suggest using the highest resolution at any target bitrate, we use VP9 at 75 Kbps and 105 Kbps. The CDF shows that Gemino’s reconstructions are robust to variations across frames and orientation changes over the course of a video. At 45 Kbps when upsampling from a 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 frame, Gemino outperforms all other baselines across all frames and both metrics. Specifically, its synthesized frames are better than FOMM by nearly 5 dB in SSIM and 10 dB in PSNR throughout. While the differences in PSNR between Bicubic atop VP9 and Gemino are small at 105 Kbps, the difference at the median is over 2 dB at 15 Kbps. The differences in SSIM is even more pronounced at 15 Kbps with Gemino outperforming both bicubic approaches by nearly 2.5 dB at the median. As the bitrate is lowered, the differences between VP8 and VP9 also shrink, resulting in very similar visual quality for both of their bicubic upsampling approaches. As we show in §<a href="#sec:app:metrics" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:app:metrics">9.2</a>, differences in PSNR are not as reflective of how natural the image looks to the human eye, and so we rely on LPIPS  primarily, and SSIM when relevant.

<figure id="fig:metrics comparison">
<embed src="figures/metric_comparison_example.pdf" />
<figcaption>Full-size examples to illustrate the visual quality differences and their correlation with the metric values.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Comparing the metrics.

To understand the difference between different quantitative metrics and the visual quality each of them map to, we show a strip (with the associated metrics) that compares Gemino with the reconstruction of bicubic atop VP8 and VP9 when upsampling 256$`\times`$<!-- -->256 frames at 45 Kbps in Fig. <a href="#fig:metrics comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison">19</a>,  <a href="#fig:metrics comparison 2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison 2">20</a>,  <a href="#fig:metrics comparison 3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison 3">21</a> and  <a href="#fig:metrics comparison 4" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison 4">22</a>. For example, in Fig. <a href="#fig:metrics comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison">19</a>, while the output produced by Gemino is significantly better than that of both bicubic approaches, it manifests as only a 2 dB difference in PSNR and SSIM, both of which have very wide ranges. In contrast, we see an improvement of $`0.1`$ in LPIPS. LPIPS is constrained to be between 0 and 1, making it easier to put the 0.1 improvement in context. We see similar trends in Fig. <a href="#fig:metrics comparison 2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison 2">20</a> and in Fig. <a href="#fig:metrics comparison 3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison 3">21</a>, where a difference of 0.13-0.14 in LPIPS, and $`\sim`$<!-- -->2 dB PSNR manifests as smoother output on the facial regions. In contrast, while the PSNRs in Fig. <a href="#fig:metrics comparison 4" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison 4">22</a> are fairly close across the bicubic approaches and Gemino, the SSIM and LPIPS differences reflect how much more natural Gemino’s facial reconstruction looks. Frames like these explain why the PSNR graphs in Fig. <a href="#fig:main_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:main_comparison">9</a> are a lot closer than the other two metrics, and motivate the use of LPIPS as our main metric. However, even though the two bicubic approaches in Fig. <a href="#fig:metrics comparison 2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:metrics comparison 2">20</a> differ significantly in the smoothness of the face, all three metrics are close enough that the difference would not be very perceptible on a plot. As a result, we acknowledge that none of these metrics are truly perfect, and a combination of them all along with visual strips is needed for a thorough evaluation.

<figure id="fig:metrics comparison 2" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/metric_comparison_example2.pdf" />
<figcaption>Full-size examples to illustrate the visual quality differences and their correlation with the metric values.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:metrics comparison 3" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/metric_comparison_example3.pdf" />
<figcaption>Full-size examples to illustrate the visual quality differences and their correlation with the metric values.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:metrics comparison 4" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/metric_comparison_example4.pdf" />
<figcaption>Full-size examples to illustrate the visual quality differences and their correlation with the metric values.</figcaption>
</figure>

[^1]: “Encoder” and “decoder” throughout this paper refer to the neural network pair typically used in GANs . When we specify *VPX* encoder or decoder, we refer to the video codec’s encoder and decoder.

[^2]: VPX refers jointly to VP8 and VP9; we delineate them when necessary.

[^3]: We observe that sending reference frames with any fixed frequency adds significant bandwidth overheads. So, we only use a single reference frame in our evaluations. We leave an investigation of mechanisms to detect the need for a new reference frame (speaker moves significantly, high-frequency content or background changes) to future work.

[^4]: We ignore the delay due to the expensive conversion between NumPy arrays and Python’s Audio Visual Frames in calculating latency because the the current PyAV library  is not optimized for conversion at higher resolutions.

[^5]: The timeseries are aligned to ensure that VP8 and Gemino receive the same video frames to remove confounding effects of differing latencies.

## References

1. {Zoom System Requirements}.
\newblock
  \url{https://support.zoom.us/hc/en-us/articles/201362023-Zoom-system-requirements-Windows-macOS-Linux}.
2. {Worldwide broadband speed league 2022}.
\newblock
  \url{https://www.cable.co.uk/broadband/speed/worldwide-speed-league/#speed}.
3. {Median Country Speeds March 2023}.
\newblock \url{https://www.speedtest.net/global-index}.
4. {The state of video conferencing 2022}.
\newblock \url{https://www.dialpad.com/blog/video-conferencing-report/}.
5. Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and
  Nicu Sebe.
\newblock First order motion model for image animation.
\newblock In {\em Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS)}, December 2019.
6. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video
  conferencing.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 10039--10049, 2021.
7. Egor Zakharov, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Aliaksandra Shysheya, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Fast bi-layer neural synthesis of one-shot realistic head avatars.
\newblock In {\em European Conference of Computer vision (ECCV)}, August 2020.
8. Maxime Oquab, Pierre Stock, Daniel Haziza, Tao Xu, Peizhao Zhang, Onur Celebi,
  Yana Hasson, Patrick Labatut, Bobo Bose-Kolanu, Thibault Peyronel, et~al.
\newblock Low bandwidth video-chat compression using deep generative models.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 2388--2397, 2021.
9. Anna Volokitin, Stefan Brugger, Ali Benlalah, Sebastian Martin, Brian Amberg,
  and Michael Tschannen.
\newblock Neural face video compression using multiple views, 2022.
10. {Unlimited HD Video Calls}.
\newblock \url{https://trueconf.com/features/modes/videocall.html}, 2021.
11. {Project Starline: Feel like you're there, together}.
\newblock \url{https://blog.google/technology/research/project-starline/},
  2021.
12. {What is the Best Audio Codec for Online Video Streaming?}
\newblock \url{https://www.dacast.com/blog/best-audio-codec/}.
13. Yue Chen, Debargha Murherjee, Jingning Han, Adrian Grange, Yaowu Xu, Zoe Liu,
  Sarah Parker, Cheng Chen, Hui Su, Urvang Joshi, et~al.
\newblock An overview of core coding tools in the {AV1} video codec.
\newblock In {\em 2018 Picture Coding Symposium (PCS)}, pages 41--45. IEEE,
  2018.
14. Debargha Mukherjee, Jingning Han, Jim Bankoski, Ronald Bultje, Adrian Grange,
  John Koleszar, Paul Wilkins, and Yaowu Xu.
\newblock A technical overview of {VP9}, the latest open-source video codec.
\newblock {\em SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal}, 124(1):44--54, 2015.
15. Jim Bankoski, Paul Wilkins, and Yaowu Xu.
\newblock Technical overview of {VP8}, an open source video codec for the web.
\newblock In {\em 2011 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo},
  pages 1--6. IEEE, 2011.
16. Heiko Schwarz, Detlev Marpe, and Thomas Wiegand.
\newblock {Overview of the scalable video coding extension of the H.264/AVC
  standard}.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology},
  17(9):1103--1120, 2007.
17. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
  Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial nets.
\newblock In {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, pages
  2672--2680, 2014.
18. Tien-Ju Yang, Andrew Howard, Bo~Chen, Xiao Zhang, Alec Go, Mark Sandler,
  Vivienne Sze, and Hartwig Adam.
\newblock {NetAdapt: Platform-Aware Neural Network Adaptation for Mobile
  Applications}.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV)}, 2018.
19. {aiortc}.
\newblock \url{https://github.com/aiortc/aiortc}.
20. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei~A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang.
\newblock The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual
  metric.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 586--595, 2018.
21. Jingyun Liang, Jiezhang Cao, Guolei Sun, Kai Zhang, Luc Van~Gool, and Radu
  Timofte.
\newblock Swinir: Image restoration using swin transformer.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 1833--1844, 2021.
22. Heiko Schwarz, Detlev Marpe, and Thomas Wiegand.
\newblock Overview of the scalable video coding extension of the h. 264/avc
  standard.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology},
  17(9):1103--1120, 2007.
23. Gary~J Sullivan, Jens-Rainer Ohm, Woo-Jin Han, and Thomas Wiegand.
\newblock {Overview of the high efficiency video coding (HEVC) standard}.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on circuits and systems for video technology},
  22(12):1649--1668, 2012.
24. Jim Bankoski, Paul Wilkins, and Yaowu Xu.
\newblock Technical overview of {VP8}, an open source video codec for the web.
\newblock In {\em 2011 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo},
  pages 1--6. IEEE, 2011.
25. Debargha Mukherjee, Jingning Han, Jim Bankoski, Ronald Bultje, Adrian Grange,
  John Koleszar, Paul Wilkins, and Yaowu Xu.
\newblock A technical overview of {VP9}, the latest open-source video codec.
\newblock {\em SMPTE Motion Imaging Journal}, 124(1):44--54, 2015.
26. Sadjad Fouladi, John Emmons, Emre Orbay, Catherine Wu, Riad~S Wahby, and Keith
  Winstein.
\newblock Salsify: Low-latency network video through tighter integration
  between a video codec and a transport protocol.
\newblock In {\em 15th {USENIX} Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
  Implementation ({NSDI} 18)}, pages 267--282, 2018.
27. {Change the quality of your video}.
\newblock \url{https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/91449?hl=en}.
28. Robert Keys.
\newblock Cubic convolution interpolation for digital image processing.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on acoustics, speech, and signal processing},
  29(6):1153--1160, 1981.
29. Pascal Getreuer.
\newblock {Linear Methods for Image Interpolation}.
\newblock {\em {Image Processing On Line}}, 1:238--259, 2011.
\newblock \url{https://doi.org/10.5201/ipol.2011.g_lmii}.
30. Chao Dong, Chen~Change Loy, Kaiming He, and Xiaoou Tang.
\newblock {Learning a deep convolutional network for image super-resolution}.
\newblock In {\em IEEE European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)}, 2014.
31. Xintao Wang, Ke~Yu, Shixiang Wu, Jinjin Gu, Yihao Liu, Chao Dong, Yu~Qiao, and
  Chen Change~Loy.
\newblock Esrgan: Enhanced super-resolution generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV)}, pages 0--0, 2018.
32. Bee Lim, Sanghyun Son, Heewon Kim, Seungjun Nah, and Kyoung Mu~Lee.
\newblock Enhanced deep residual networks for single image super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition workshops}, pages 136--144, 2017.
33. Jose Caballero, Christian Ledig, Andrew Aitken, Alejandro Acosta, Johannes
  Totz, Zehan Wang, and Wenzhe Shi.
\newblock Real-time video super-resolution with spatio-temporal networks and
  motion compensation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 4778--4787, 2017.
34. Jingyun Liang, Jiezhang Cao, Yuchen Fan, Kai Zhang, Rakesh Ranjan, Yawei Li,
  Radu Timofte, and Luc Van~Gool.
\newblock Vrt: A video restoration transformer.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.12288}, 2022. [arXiv:2201.12288](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.12288)
35. Zhengdong Zhang and Vivienne Sze.
\newblock {FAST: A framework to accelerate super-resolution processing on
  compressed videos}.
\newblock In {\em {Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops}}, pages 19--28, 2017.
36. Hyunho Yeo, Chan~Ju Chong, Youngmok Jung, Juncheol Ye, and Dongsu Han.
\newblock Nemo: Enabling neural-enhanced video streaming on commodity mobile
  devices.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on
  Mobile Computing and Networking}, MobiCom '20, New York, NY, USA, 2020.
  Association for Computing Machinery.
37. Yu~Chen, Ying Tai, Xiaoming Liu, Chunhua Shen, and Jian Yang.
\newblock Fsrnet: End-to-end learning face super-resolution with facial priors.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 2492--2501, 2018.
38. Cheng Ma, Zhenyu Jiang, Yongming Rao, Jiwen Lu, and Jie Zhou.
\newblock Deep face super-resolution with iterative collaboration between
  attentive recovery and landmark estimation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 5569--5578, 2020.
39. Mehrdad Khani, Vibhaalakshmi Sivaraman, and Mohammad Alizadeh.
\newblock Efficient video compression via content-adaptive super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 4521--4530, 2021.
40. Hyunho Yeo, Youngmok Jung, Jaehong Kim, Jinwoo Shin, and Dongsu Han.
\newblock Neural adaptive content-aware internet video delivery.
\newblock In {\em 13th {USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
  Implementation ({OSDI} 18)}, pages 645--661, 2018.
41. Mallesham Dasari, Kumara Kahatapitiya, Samir~R. Das, Aruna Balasubramanian, and
  Dimitris Samaras.
\newblock Swift: Adaptive video streaming with layered neural codecs.
\newblock In {\em 19th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
  Implementation (NSDI 22)}, pages 103--118, Renton, WA, April 2022. USENIX
  Association.
42. Jaehong Kim, Youngmok Jung, Hyunho Yeo, Juncheol Ye, and Dongsu Han.
\newblock Neural-enhanced live streaming: Improving live video ingest via
  online learning.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Annual conference of the ACM Special
  Interest Group on Data Communication on the applications, technologies,
  architectures, and protocols for computer communication}, pages 107--125,
  2020.
43. Pan Hu, Rakesh Misra, and Sachin Katti.
\newblock Dejavu: Enhancing videoconferencing with prior knowledge.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 20th International Workshop on Mobile
  Computing Systems and Applications}, pages 63--68, 2019.
44. Arun Mallya, Ting-Chun Wang, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock Implicit warping for animation with image sets, 2022.
45. Arsha Nagrani, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identification dataset.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612}, 2017. [arXiv:1706.08612](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08612)
46. Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox.
\newblock U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Medical image computing and
  computer-assisted intervention}, pages 234--241. Springer, 2015.
47. {AV1} bitstream \& decoding process specification.
\newblock \url{http://aomedia.org/av1/specification/}.
48. Andrew~G Howard, Menglong Zhu, Bo~Chen, Dmitry Kalenichenko, Weijun Wang,
  Tobias Weyand, Marco Andreetto, and Hartwig Adam.
\newblock Mobilenets: Efficient convolutional neural networks for mobile vision
  applications.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.04861}, 2017. [arXiv:1704.04861](https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.04861)
49. Diana Wofk, Fangchang Ma, Tien-Ju Yang, Sertac Karaman, and Vivienne Sze.
\newblock {FastDepth: Fast Monocular Depth Estimation on Embedded Systems}.
\newblock {\em 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
  (ICRA)}, pages 6101--6108, 2019.
50. International~Telecommunication Union.
\newblock {ITU-T G.1010: End-user multimedia QoS categories}.
\newblock In {\em Series G: Transmission Systems and Media, Digital Systems and
  Networks}, 2001.
51. {WebRTC}.
\newblock \url{https://webrtc.org/}.
52. Henning Schulzrinne, Stephen Casner, Ron Frederick, and Van Jacobson.
\newblock Rtp: A transport protocol for real-time applications, 1996.
53. Opus interactive audio codec.
\newblock \url{https://opus-codec.org/}.
54. Pyav documentation.
\newblock \url{https://pyav.org/docs/stable/}.
55. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
  Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, Alban
  Desmaison, Andreas Kopf, Edward Yang, Zachary DeVito, Martin Raison, Alykhan
  Tejani, Sasank Chilamkurthy, Benoit Steiner, Lu~Fang, Junjie Bai, and Soumith
  Chintala.
\newblock Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library.
\newblock In {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32}, pages
  8024--8035. Curran Associates, Inc., 2019.
56. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}, 2018. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
57. {Google Meet Hardware}.
\newblock \url{"https://workspace.google.com/products/meet-hardware/"}.
58. {Explore hardware options to enable Zoom}.
\newblock \url{https://explore.zoom.us/en/workspaces/conference-room/}.
59. Takeru Miyato, Toshiki Kataoka, Masanori Koyama, and Yuichi Yoshida.
\newblock Spectral normalization for generative adversarial networks.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.05957}, 2018. [arXiv:1802.05957](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.05957)
60. Diederik~P Kingma and Jimmy Ba.
\newblock Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980}, 2014. [arXiv:1412.6980](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980)
61. Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li~Fei-Fei.
\newblock Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em European conference on computer vision}, pages 694--711.
  Springer, 2016.
62. Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Guilin Liu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz,
  and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Video-to-video synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06601}, 2018. [arXiv:1808.06601](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06601)
63. {{VP8} {Chromium} Implementation}.
\newblock
  \url{https://chromium.googlesource.com/external/webrtc/+/143cec1cc68b9ba44f3ef4467f1422704f2395f0/webrtc/modules/video_coding/codecs/vp8/vp8_impl.cc}.
64. {WebRTC connectivity}.
\newblock
  \url{https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WebRTC_API/Connectivity}.
65. Zhou Wang, Alan~C Bovik, Hamid~R Sheikh, and Eero~P Simoncelli.
\newblock Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural
  similarity.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on image processing}, 13(4):600--612, 2004.
66. Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Meghan
  Cowan, Haichen Shen, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, et~al.
\newblock {TVM: An automated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learning}.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04799}, 2018. [arXiv:1802.04799](https://arxiv.org/abs/1802.04799)
67. {NVIDIA TensorRT}.
\newblock \url{https://developer.nvidia.com/tensorrt}.
68. {What Is Apple's Neural Engine and How Does It Work?}
\newblock
  \url{https://www.makeuseof.com/what-is-a-neural-engine-how-does-it-work/}.
69. {Android Neural Networks API}.
\newblock \url{https://source.android.com/docs/core/ota/modular-system/nnapi}.
70. Kunihiko Fukushima and Sei Miyake.
\newblock Neocognitron: A self-organizing neural network model for a mechanism
  of visual pattern recognition.
\newblock In {\em Competition and cooperation in neural nets}, pages 267--285.
  Springer, 1982.
71. Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy.
\newblock Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing
  internal covariate shift.
\newblock In Francis Bach and David Blei, editors, {\em Proceedings of the 32nd
  International Conference on Machine Learning}, volume~37 of {\em Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research}, pages 448--456, Lille, France, 07--09 Jul
  2015. PMLR.
72. Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey~E Hinton.
\newblock Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks.
\newblock {\em Communications of the ACM}, 60(6):84--90, 2017.
73. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
\newblock Deep residual learning for image recognition.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 770--778, 2016.
