---
arxiv_id: '2212.04248'
title: Talking Head Generation with Probabilistic Audio-to-Visual Diffusion Priors
authors:
- Zhentao Yu
- Zixin Yin
- Deyu Zhou
- Duomin Wang
- Finn Wong
- Baoyuan Wang
submitted: '2022-12-07'
categories:
- cs.GR
- cs.CV
- cs.SD
- eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.04248
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 22/69
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:25:05+00:00'
references_parsed: 69
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Experiments

Our proposed method was evaluated from two aspects: 1) synchronization between audio and lip motion; 2) naturalness and richness of the lip-irrelevant facial motion. Both quantitative and qualitative experiments were conducted to showcase the superiority of our method. In addition, we also come up with a novel metric to measure the overall quality of generated facial motions.

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;">Method</th>
<th colspan="4" style="text-align: center;">VoxCeleb2</th>
<th colspan="4" style="text-align: center;">VoxCeleb1</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>2-9</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">Var→</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">FID<sub><em>f</em><em>m</em></sub>↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">FID<sub><em>Δ</em><em>f</em><em>m</em></sub>↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">SND↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">Var→</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">FID<sub><em>f</em><em>m</em></sub>↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">FID<sub><em>Δ</em><em>f</em><em>m</em></sub>↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">SND↓</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">GT</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.98</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MakeItTalk <span class="citation" data-cites="zhou2020makelttalk"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.67</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.70</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.74</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.44</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.07</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.34</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Audio2head <span class="citation" data-cites="wang2021audio2head"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.89</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.30</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.24</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.76</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.03</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.01</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.04</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Ours + AR prior</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.07</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.43</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.22</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.65</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.92</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.21</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.68</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.89</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Ours + Diff. prior</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.66</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.81</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.13</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.94</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.73</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.17</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.84</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>5.01</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">w/o <span class="math inline"><em>L</em><sub><em>v</em><em>e</em><em>l</em></sub></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.09</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.02</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.27</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.29</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.28</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.65</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.76</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">training w/o editing</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.76</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8.76</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.06</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.70</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8.66</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

#### Datasets

Our model was trained on VoxCeleb2 and evaluated on both VoxCeleb1 and VoxCeleb2. Here are the details of the two datasets,

- **VoxCeleb1 :** The dataset consists of 100,000 utterances from 1,251 celebrities. 100 videos with 25 identities in total were randomly chosen for the test.

- **VoxCeleb2 :** The dataset contains 1 million utterances with 6,112 identities. 500 test videos with 25 identities were randomly chosen for the test.

#### Baselines

The following methods were selected to compare synchronization and image quality: Wav2Lip , MakeItTalk , PC-AVS , Audio2head  and EAMM . Notably, since MakeItTalk and Audio2head can be driven by audio only, we compare natualness and richness with them. Others were not selected due to the fact that either pre-trained models are not released or additional driving sources are required.

#### Implementation Details

Backbones of our models including $`\text{E}_{id}`$, $`\text{E}_{v}`$, $`\text{E}_{a}`$, $`\text{G}`$, and $`\text{D}`$ are borrowed from . For the diffusion prior network $`\text{P}_{a2nl}`$, we use a 8-layer transformer  with 512-d tokens and 1024-d fully feed-forward layers. Note that our models were trained on VoxCeleb2 only but tested on both VoxCeleb1 and VoxCeleb2. All models were trained on 4 NVIDIA A100 GPUs.

## Quantitative Evaluation

#### Evaluation Metrics

We evaluate the performance of generated talking head from the following aspects: image quality, audio-lip sync accuracy, the variation and naturalness of non-lip facial motion. Frechet Inception Distance (**FID**) score  is used for the evaluation of image quality. A lower **FID** score indicates a lower distance between the distribution of generated images and real images. Following prior works , we use SyncNet Error-Confidence ($`\textbf{S}_{c}`$) and SyncNet Error-Distance ($`\textbf{S}_{d}`$) as the indicators of audio-lip synchronization, where greater confidence or lower distance indicates better synchronization.

To evaluate facial motions such as pose, expression, and blink, we utilize a pre-trained 3D morphable face model  and include shape irrelevant 3DMM parameters to calculate the following metrics.

- **Var**: The variance of generated facial motions, , the variance of the 3DMM coefficients for each video is calculated and then averaged over the test set. A closer **Var** to GT indicates a better match to the variation of real data.

- $`\textbf{FID}_{fm}`$: FID score of 3DMM coefficients calculated as follows: $`\textbf{FID}_{fm}=\frac{1}{K}\sum_{i=1}^{K}\textbf{FID}(\beta_i)`$, where $`\beta_i`$ is a sequence of 3DMM coefficients in the $`i`$-th video.

- $`\textbf{FID}_{\Delta{fm}}`$: FID score of 3DMM coefficient difference between consecutive frames, , **$`\textbf{FID}_{\Delta{fm}}`$**, which is similar to $`\textbf{FID}_{fm}`$ but the 3DMM coefficient difference between consecutive frames is measured, taking temporal naturalness into consideration.

- **SND**: Our new proposed metric, denoted as **Sequence Naturalness Distance**. It is the sum of $`\textbf{FID}_{fm}`$ and $`\textbf{FID}_{\Delta{fm}}`$ indicating the difference of distribution between generated motion and GT motion, from both spatial and temporal perspectives, , $`\textbf{SND}=\textbf{FID}_{fm} + \textbf{FID}_{\Delta{fm}}`$. The lower **SND**, the better naturalness.

<figure id="fig:gallery1" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/gallery1_v8.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative results of our method compared to other baselines. Each row shows nine uniformly sampled frames from videos. Here we use two audio sources to drive different identities respectively. Our method shows accurate lip-audio synchronization with diverse and natural poses and expressions. </figcaption>
</figure>

#### Evaluation Results

Our main results consist of two parts: audio-lip synchronization and image quality as shown in Table <a href="#table:main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:main">[table:main]</a>; richness and sequence naturalness which are shown in Table <a href="#table:diversity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:diversity">[table:diversity]</a>.

It shows that our method with diffusion prior archives relatively good synchronization scores compared to other methods in Table <a href="#table:main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:main">[table:main]</a>. Note that Wav2Lip  and PC-AVS  use either additional datasets or SyncNet during training. Thus they achieve the highest SyncNet scores. However, our SyncNet scores are almost closest to the GT, indicating the most substantial synchronization ability , which is demonstrated in Sec. <a href="#sec:Qualitative" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:Qualitative">1.2</a>. Meanwhile, the image quality of our model with diffusion prior is comparable to PC-AVS, better than other baselines. Since it is not our main focus to improve image quality, we build our generation loss based on PC-AVS.

In Table <a href="#table:diversity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:diversity">[table:diversity]</a>, our method shows significantly higher variance than the other two audio-driven methods, and it is closer to the variance of real data. Rather than slight head movement, our method can produce diverse head movements and expressions with audio only. It’s notable that auto-regressive prior, trained with causal attention and regression loss, has a higher variance than GT because sometimes it generates motions with extreme pose or expression, showing a low naturalness score in Table <a href="#table:human" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:human">[table:human]</a>. For naturalness, our method achieves the lowest $`\textbf{FID}_{fm}`$, $`\textbf{FID}_{{\Delta}{fm}}`$ as well as **SND** on both VoxCeleb1 and VoxCeleb2, surpassing other state-of-the-art by a large margin. In summary, our method can generate rich facial motions with excellent realism (, a lower distribution distance) and naturalness.

To quantify the one-to-many diversity, we also investigated **Multimodality** from MDM  to measure the average distance of 3DMM parameters between different runs given the same inputs. However, due to the lack of one-to-many data, , multiple videos corresponding to the same audio, we only calculate it as 2.31 for future comparison.

## Qualitative Evaluation

Two audio-driven video sequences of our method verses other baselines are shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:gallery1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:gallery1">1</a>. It’s clearly shown that our method is capable of producing much more natural-looking and diverse facial motions than other baselines, including pose, expression, blink and gaze, while maintaining accurate audio-lip synchronization compared to the GT.

#### User Study

We invited 20 subjects for human evaluations, focusing on three aspects: 1) the accuracy of audio-lip synchronization; 2) the naturalness of non-lip motions and coherency between non-lip motions and audios; 3) the richness of non-lip motions. 50 videos are generated from audio and identity in the test set using the following methods: our diffusion prior, our auto-regressive prior, MakeItTalk , Audio2head  and PC-AVS  (driven by poses from another video). After shuffling the generated videos, each annotator rates from 1 (bad) to 5 (good) according to Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) rating protocol. Table <a href="#table:human" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:human">[table:human]</a> tells that our model with diffusion prior archives the best synchronization, naturalness and richness among all the models. Our model with auto-regressive prior archives relatively good richness compared to the remaining models, we attribute it to the exposure bias problem  brought by auto-regressive generation, which leads to high richness but low naturalness. Note that PC-AVS shows incompatible result in Table <a href="#table:human" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:human">[table:human]</a> as compared to Table <a href="#table:main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:main">[table:main]</a> on synchronization scores, indicating that choosing pose driving signals from a random video may lead to synthesis results with bad audio-lip synchronization.

It’s interesting that our proposed **SND** scores reflect the **naturalness** of user study to some degree. Nevertheless, we leave it to future work for rigorous study of their correlation through more human evaluations.

## Ablation

Table <a href="#table:disentangle" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:disentangle">[table:disentangle]</a> discusses the performance of lip & non-lip disentanglement. While tested on lip only metrics without $`L_{ol}`$, SyncNet scores get lower, which indicates that $`\text{G}`$ tends to generate mouth movements with information extracted from visual modality instead of audio. Thus, lip & non-lip space are not fully disentangled. Without **MB**, the performance of driving non-lip motions gets worse. Because it is hard to use a large batch to compute correlation, resulting in a not well decoupled non-lip space.

We conducted ablation study for $`\text{P}_{a2nl}`$ from three aspects: 1) auto-regressive prior versus diffusion prior; 2) with/without velocity loss $`L_{vel}`$; 3) training with/without editing mechanism. Diffusion prior shows siginificant improvements on naturalness scores including $`\text{FID}_{fm}`$, $`\text{FID}_{\Delta{fm}}`$ and **SND**, as compared to autoregressive prior shown in Table <a href="#table:diversity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:diversity">[table:diversity]</a>, with slightly better synchronization ability in Table <a href="#table:main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:main">[table:main]</a>. Fig. <a href="#fig:ablation_vel" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ablation_vel">2</a> shows that without $`L_{vel}`$, the prediction of non-autogressive diffusion prior model $`\text{P}_{a2nl}`$ becomes unstable, which leads to a larger variance and worse **SND** scores in Table <a href="#table:diversity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:diversity">[table:diversity]</a>. While training without the editing mechanism mentioned in Sec. <a href="#section:diffusion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="section:diffusion">[section:diffusion]</a>, we applied editing only during sampling as in MDM , and observed that it jitters between adjacent frames as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:ablation_editing" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ablation_editing">3</a>, resulting in a poorer **SND** score in Table <a href="#table:diversity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:diversity">[table:diversity]</a>. Note that our model trained with editing mechanism generates smoother results.

<figure id="fig:ablation_vel" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/ablation_v5.pdf" style="width:45.0%;height:21.04%" />
<figcaption>Ablation study of our diffusion prior <span class="math inline">P<sub><em>a</em>2<em>n</em><em>l</em></sub></span> w or w/o <span class="math inline"><em>L</em><sub><em>v</em><em>e</em><em>l</em></sub></span>. Each row shows five uniformly sampled frames from videos. </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:ablation_editing" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figures/ablation_v5.pdf" style="width:45.0%;height:21.04%" />
<figcaption>Ablation study of our diffusion prior <span class="math inline">P<sub><em>a</em>2<em>n</em><em>l</em></sub></span> trained w or w/o editing. Each row shows five adjacent frames. </figcaption>
</figure>

## References

1. Ahmed~A Abdelrahman, Thorsten Hempel, Aly Khalifa, and Ayoub Al-Hamadi.
\newblock L2cs-net: Fine-grained gaze estimation in unconstrained environments.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.03339}, 2022. [arXiv:2203.03339](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.03339)
2. Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Adri{\`a} Recasens, Rosalia Schneider, Relja
  Arandjelovi{\'c}, Jason Ramapuram, Jeffrey De~Fauw, Lucas Smaira, Sander
  Dieleman, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock {S}elf-{S}upervised {M}ulti{M}odal {V}ersatile {N}etworks.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2020.
3. Mohammed~M Alghamdi, He Wang, Andrew~J Bulpitt, and David~C Hogg.
\newblock Talking head from speech audio using a pre-trained image generator.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.04252}, 2022. [arXiv:2209.04252](./2209.04252.md)
4. Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, and Furu Wei.
\newblock Beit: {BERT} pre-training of image transformers.
\newblock {\em CoRR}, abs/2106.08254, 2021.
5. Samy Bengio, Oriol Vinyals, Navdeep Jaitly, and Noam Shazeer.
\newblock Scheduled sampling for sequence prediction with recurrent neural
  networks.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 28, 2015.
6. Stella Bounareli, Vasileios Argyriou, and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock Finding directions in gan's latent space for neural face reenactment.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.00046}, 2022. [arXiv:2202.00046](./2202.00046.md)
7. Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock How far are we from solving the 2d \& 3d face alignment problem? (and
  a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks).
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Computer Vision}, 2017.
8. Egor Burkov, Igor Pasechnik, Artur Grigorev, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Neural head reenactment with latent pose descriptors.
\newblock In {\em IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}, June 2020.
9. Joon~Son Chung, Jaesung Huh, Seongkyu Mun, Minjae Lee, Hee~Soo Heo, Soyeon
  Choe, Chiheon Ham, Sunghwan Jung, Bong-Jin Lee, and Icksang Han.
\newblock In defence of metric learning for speaker recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.11982}, 2020. [arXiv:2003.11982](https://arxiv.org/abs/2003.11982)
10. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}, 2018. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
11. Soo-Whan Chung, Joon~Son Chung, and Hong-Goo Kang.
\newblock Perfect match: Improved cross-modal embeddings for audio-visual
  synchronisation.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 3965--3969. IEEE, 2019.
12. Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong.
\newblock Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From
  single image to image set.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops}, pages 0--0, 2019.
13. Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova.
\newblock Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
  understanding.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805}, 2018. [arXiv:1810.04805](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805)
14. Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol.
\newblock Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  34:8780--8794, 2021.
15. Aviv Gabbay, Asaph Shamir, and Shmuel Peleg.
\newblock Visual speech enhancement.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.08789}, 2017. [arXiv:1711.08789](https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.08789)
16. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
  Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial networks.
\newblock {\em Communications of the ACM}, 63(11):139--144, 2020.
17. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yongjin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em {IEEE/CVF} International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV)}, 2021.
18. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
  Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash
  equilibrium.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
19. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.
\newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  33:6840--6851, 2020.
20. Fangzhou Hong, Liang Pan, Zhongang Cai, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Versatile multi-modal pre-training for human-centric perception.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 16156--16166, 2022.
21. Fa-Ting Hong, Longhao Zhang, Li Shen, and Dan Xu.
\newblock Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head video
  generation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 3397--3406, 2022.
22. Gee-Sern Hsu, Chun-Hung Tsai, and Hung-Yi Wu.
\newblock Dual-generator face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 642--650, 2022.
23. Po-Hsiang Huang, Fu-En Yang, and Yu-Chiang~Frank Wang.
\newblock Learning identity-invariant motion representations for cross-id face
  reenactment.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 7084--7092, 2020.
24. Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Wayne Wu, Feng Xu, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Eamm: One-shot emotional talking face via audio-based emotion-aware
  motion model.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.15278}, 2022. [arXiv:2205.15278](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.15278)
25. Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xun Cao, and
  Feng Xu.
\newblock Audio-driven emotional video portraits.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, 2021.
26. Venkatesh~S Kadandale, Juan~F Montesinos, and Gloria Haro.
\newblock Vocalist: An audio-visual synchronisation model for lips and voices.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02090}, 2022. [arXiv:2204.02090](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02090)
27. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila.
\newblock A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial
  networks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 4401--4410, 2019.
28. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and
  Timo Aila.
\newblock Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 8110--8119, 2020.
29. Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Ayush Tewari, Weipeng Xu, Justus Thies, Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner, Patrick P{\'e}rez, Christian Richardt, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer,
  and Christian Theobalt.
\newblock Deep video portraits.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 37(4):163:1--14, Aug. 2018.
30. Davis~E. King.
\newblock Dlib-ml: A machine learning toolkit.
\newblock {\em Journal of Machine Learning Research}, 10:1755--1758, 2009.
31. Zhifeng Kong, Wei Ping, Jiaji Huang, Kexin Zhao, and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Diffwave: A versatile diffusion model for audio synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.09761}, 2020. [arXiv:2009.09761](https://arxiv.org/abs/2009.09761)
32. Jiyoung Lee, Soo-Whan Chung, Sunok Kim, Hong-Goo Kang, and Kwanghoon Sohn.
\newblock Looking into your speech: Learning cross-modal affinity for
  audio-visual speech separation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 1336--1345, 2021.
33. Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu
  Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual
  control.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 3387--3396, June 2022.
34. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-head
  animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 40(6):1--17, 2021.
35. Dongchan Min, Minyoung Song, and Sung~Ju Hwang.
\newblock Styletalker: One-shot style-based audio-driven talking head video
  generation.
\newblock {\em preprint arXiv:2208.10922}, 2022. [arXiv:2208.10922](https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.10922)
36. Gaurav Mittal and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Animating face using disentangled audio representations.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications
  of Computer Vision (WACV)}, March 2020.
37. Arsha Nagrani, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identification dataset.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612}, 2017. [arXiv:1706.08612](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08612)
38. Arsha Nagrani, Joon son Chung, Samuel Albanie, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Disentangled speech embeddings using cross-modal self-supervision,
  2020.
39. Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin,
  Bob McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen.
\newblock Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741}, 2021. [arXiv:2112.10741](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10741)
40. Andrew~Zisserman Olivia~Wiles, A. Sophia~Koepke.
\newblock X2face: A network for controlling face generation by using images,
  audio, and pose codes.
\newblock In {\em ECCV 2018}, 2018.
41. KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
42. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh,
  Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark,
  et~al.
\newblock Learning transferable visual models from natural language
  supervision.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages
  8748--8763. PMLR, 2021.
43. Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen.
\newblock Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125}, 2022. [arXiv:2204.06125](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125)
44. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj{\"o}rn
  Ommer.
\newblock High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 10684--10695, 2022.
45. Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, Menglong Zhu, Andrey Zhmoginov, and Liang-Chieh
  Chen.
\newblock Mobilenetv2: Inverted residuals and linear bottlenecks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 4510--4520, 2018.
46. Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Yueqi Duan, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11770}, 2022. [arXiv:2207.11770](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.11770)
47. Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556}, 2014. [arXiv:1409.1556](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556)
48. Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan
  Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et~al.
\newblock Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792}, 2022. [arXiv:2209.14792](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14792)
49. Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli.
\newblock Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages
  2256--2265. PMLR, 2015.
50. Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon.
\newblock Denoising diffusion implicit models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502}, 2020. [arXiv:2010.02502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502)
51. Guy Tevet, Sigal Raab, Brian Gordon, Yonatan Shafir, Daniel Cohen-Or, and
  Amit~H Bermano.
\newblock Human motion diffusion model.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14916}, 2022. [arXiv:2209.14916](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14916)
52. Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock {\em ECCV 2020}, 2020.
53. Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger, Christian Theobalt, and
  Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Face2face: Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 2387--2395, 2016.
54. Yonglong Tian, Dilip Krishnan, and Phillip Isola.
\newblock Contrastive multiview coding.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05849}, 2019. [arXiv:1906.05849](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.05849)
55. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
  Aidan~N Gomez, {\L}ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.
\newblock Attention is all you need.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
56. Konstantinos Vougioukas, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Realistic speech-driven facial animation with gans.
\newblock {\em CoRR}, abs/1906.06337, 2019.
57. Rui Wang, Dongdong Chen, Zuxuan Wu, Yinpeng Chen, Xiyang Dai, Mengchen Liu,
  Yu-Gang Jiang, Luowei Zhou, and Lu Yuan.
\newblock Bevt: Bert pretraining of video transformers.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
58. Suzhen Wang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, Changjie Fan, and Xin Yu.
\newblock Audio2head: Audio-driven one-shot talking-head generation with
  natural head motion.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.09293}, 2021. [arXiv:2107.09293](../2021/2107.09293.md)
59. Wenhui Wang, Hangbo Bao, Li Dong, Johan Bjorck, Zhiliang Peng, Qiang Liu, Kriti
  Aggarwal, Owais~Khan Mohammed, Saksham Singhal, Subhojit Som, and Furu Wei.
\newblock Image as a foreign language: Beit pretraining for all vision and
  vision-language tasks.
\newblock {\em CoRR}, abs/2208.10442, 2022.
60. Saining Xie, Ross Girshick, Piotr Doll{\'a}r, Zhuowen Tu, and Kaiming He.
\newblock Aggregated residual transformations for deep neural networks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 1492--1500, 2017.
61. Shunyu Yao, RuiZhe Zhong, Yichao Yan, Guangtao Zhai, and Xiaokang Yang.
\newblock Dfa-nerf: Personalized talking head generation via disentangled face
  attributes neural rendering.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00791}, 2022. [arXiv:2201.00791](./2201.00791.md)
62. Baosheng Yu and Dacheng Tao.
\newblock Heatmap regression via randomized rounding.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence},
  2021.
63. Egor Zakharov, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Burkov, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Few-shot adversarial learning of realistic neural talking head
  models.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV)}, October 2019.
64. Xianfang Zeng, Yusu Pan, Mengmeng Wang, Jiangning Zhang, and Yong Liu.
\newblock Realistic face reenactment via self-supervised disentangling of
  identity and pose.
\newblock pages 12757--12764. {AAAI} Press, 2020.
65. Chenxu Zhang, Yifan Zhao, Yifei Huang, Ming Zeng, Saifeng Ni, Madhukar
  Budagavi, and Xiaohu Guo.
\newblock Facial: Synthesizing dynamic talking face with implicit attribute
  learning.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision}, pages 3867--3876, 2021.
66. Jiangning Zhang, Liang Liu, Zhucun Xue, and Yong Liu.
\newblock Apb2face: Audio-guided face reenactment with auxiliary pose and blink
  signals.
\newblock 2020.
67. Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang.
\newblock Talking face generation by adversarially disentangled audio-visual
  representation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence}, volume~33, pages 9299--9306, 2019.
68. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei
  Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized
  audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 4176--4186, 2021.
69. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis,
  and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 39(6):1--15, 2020.
