---
arxiv_id: s2:e3d8c277a9a688d57ca1d33408ba36b2c3c4ec66
title: 'Meta Talk: Learning To Data-Efficiently Generate Audio-Driven Lip-Synchronized
  Talking Face With High Definition'
authors:
- Yuhan Zhang
- Weihua He
- Minglei Li
- Kun Tian
- Ziyang Zhang
- Jie Cheng
- Yaoyuan Wang
- Jianxing Liao
submitted: '2022-05-23'
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/e3d8c277a9a688d57ca1d33408ba36b2c3c4ec66
source: metadata-only
converter: none
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/0
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T14:23:48+00:00'
references_parsed: 0
arxiv_version: ''
---

## Abstract

Audio-driven talking face, driving talking face by audio, has received considerable attention in multi-modal learning due to its widespread use in virtual reality. However, long-time recording of target high-quality video is needed by most existing audio-driven talking face studies, which significantly increases customization costs. This paper proposes a novel data-efficient audio-driven talking face generation method, which uses just a short target video to produce both lip-synchronized and high-definition face video driven by arbitrary audio in the wild. Current methods suffer from many problems, such as low definition, asynchronization of lip movement and voice, and intense demands for videos for training. In this work, the original target character’s face images are decomposed into 3D face model parameters including expression, geometry, illumination, etc. Then, low-definition pseudo video generated by an adapted target face video bridges the powerful pre-trained audio-driven model to our audio-to-expression transformation network and help to transfer the ability of audio-identity disentanglement. The expression is replaced via an audio and then combined with other face parameters to render a synthetic face. Finally, a neural rendering network translates the synthetic face into talking face without loss of definition. Experimental results show that the proposed method has the best performance in high-definition image quality, and comparable performance in lip synchronization compared with the existing state-of-the-art methods.
