---
arxiv_id: '2403.17881'
title: 'Deepfake Generation and Detection: A Benchmark and Survey'
authors:
- Gan Pei
- Jiangning Zhang
- Menghan Hu
- Zhenyu Zhang
- Chengjie Wang
- Yunsheng Wu
- Guangtao Zhai
- Jian Yang
- Dacheng Tao
submitted: '2024-03-26'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.17881
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/366
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:19:58+00:00'
references_parsed: 366
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Deepfake Inspections: A Survey

## **Deepfake Generation**

### **Face Swapping**

.

In this section, we review face swapping methods from the perspective of basic architecture, which can be mainly divided into four categories and summarized in  <a href="#tab:faceswap1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:faceswap1">[tab:faceswap1]</a>.

$`\bullet`$ **Traditional Graphics.** As representative early implementations, traditional graphics methods in the implementation path can be divided into two categories: **1)** Key information matching and fusion. Methods  ground in critical information matching and fusion are geared towards substituting corresponding regions by aligning key points within facial regions of interest (ROIs), such as the mouth, eyes, nose, and mouth, between the source and target images. Following this, additional procedures such as boundary blending and lighting adjustments are executed to produce the resulting image. Bitouk   accomplish automated face replacement by constructing a substantial face database to locate faces with akin poses and lighting conditions for substitution. Meanwhile, Nirkin   enhance keypoint matching and segmentation accuracy by incorporating a Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) into their method. **2)** The construction of a 3D prior model for facial parameterization. Methods  based on constructing a 3D prior and introducing a facial parameter model often involve building a facial parameter model using 3DMM technology based on a pre-collected face database. After matching the facial information of the source image with the constructed face model, specific modifications are made to the relevant parameters of the facial parameter model to generate a completely new face. Dale   utilize 3DMM to track facial expressions in two videos, enabling face swapping in videos. Some methods  explore scenarios involving significant pose differences between the source and target images. Lin   construct a 3D face model from frontal faces, renderable in any pose. Guo   utilize plane parameterization and affine transformation to establish a one-to-one dense mapping between 2D graphics. Traditional computer graphics methods solve basic face-swapping problems, exploring full automation to enhance generalization. However, these methods are constrained by the need for similarities in pose and lighting between source and target images. They also face challenges like low image resolution, modification of target attributes, and poor performance in extreme lighting and occlusion scenarios.

$`\bullet`$ **Generative Adversarial Network.** GAN-based methods can be classified into seven categories:

**1)** Early GAN-based methods  address issues related to the similarity of pose and lighting between source and target images. DepthNets  combines GANs with 3DMM to map the source face to any target geometry, not limited to the geometric shape of the target template. This allows it to be less affected by differences in pose between the source and target faces. However, they face challenges in generalizing the trained model to unknown faces.

**2)** Improved Generalizability. To improve the model’s generalization, many efforts  are made to explore solutions. Combining GANs with VAEs, the model  encodes and processes different facial regions separately. FSGAN  integrates face reenactment with face swap, designing a facial blending network to mix two faces seamlessly. SimSwap  introduces an identity injection module to avoid integrating identity information into the decoder. These methods remain limited by low resolution, attribute degradation, and poor handling of facial occlusions.

**3)** Resolution Upgrading. Some methods  aim to improve the resolution of generated faces. MegaFS  introduces the first single-lens face swapping method at the million-pixel level. The encoder no longer compresses facial information but represents it in layers, achieving more detailed preservation. StyleIPSB  constrains semantic attribute codes within the subspace of StyleGAN, thereby fixing semantic information during face swapping to preserve pore-level details.

**4)** Geometric Detail Preservation. To capture and reproduce more facial geometric details, some methods  introduce 3DMM into GANs, enabling the incorporation of 3D priors. HifiFace  introduces a novel 3D shape-aware identity extractor, replacing traditional face recognition networks to generate identity vectors that include precise shape information. FlowFace  introduces a two-stage framework based on semantic guidance to achieve shape-aware face swapping. FlowFace++  improves upon FlowFace by utilizing a pre-trained Mask Autoencoder to convert face images into a fine-grained representation space shared between the target and source faces. It further enhances feature fusion for both source and target by introducing a cross-attention fusion module. However, most of the aforementioned methods often struggle to effectively handle occlusion issues.

**5)** Facial Masking Artifacts. Some methods  have partially alleviated the artifacts caused by facial occlusion. FSGAN  designs a restoration network to estimate missing pixels. E4S  redefines the face-swapping problem as a mask-exchanging problem for specific information. It utilizes a mask-guided injection module to perform face swapping in the latent space of StyleGAN. However, overall, the methods above have not thoroughly addressed the issue of artifacts in generated images under extreme occlusion conditions.

**6)** Trade-offs between Identity-replacement and Attribute-retention. In addition to the occlusion issues that need further handling, researchers  discover that the balance between identity replacement and attribute preservation in generated images seems akin to a seesaw. Many methods  explore the equilibrium between identity replacement and attribute retention. StyleSwap  introduces a novel swapping guidance strategy, the ID reversal, to enhance the similarity of facial identity in the output. Shiohara   propose BlendFace, using an identity encoder that extracts identity features from the source image and uses it as identity distance loss, guiding the generator to produce facial exchange results.

**7)** Model Light-weighting is also an important topic with profound implications for the widespread application of models. FastSwap  achieves this by innovating a decoder block called Triple Adaptive Normalization (TAN), effectively integrating identity information from the source image and pose information from the target image. XimSwap  modifies the design of convolutional blocks and the identity injection mechanism, successfully deploying on STM32H743.

$`\bullet`$ **Diffusion-based.** The latest studies  in this area produce promising generation results. DiffSwaps  redefines the face swapping problem as a conditional inpainting task. Liu   introduce a multi-modal face generation framework and achieved this by introducing components such as balanced identity and expression encoders to the conditional diffusion model, striking a balance between identity replacement and attribute preservation during the generation process. As a novel facial generalist model, FaceX  can achieve various facial tasks, including face swapping and editing. Leveraging the pre-trained StableDiffusion  has significantly improved the quality and model training speed. Baliah   achieves improved identity fidelity, pose consistency, and generalization through self-supervised inpainting, DDIM multi-step sampling, CLIP-based feature disentanglement, and mask shuffling.

$`\bullet`$ **Alternative Techniques.** Some methods stand independently from the above classifications that are discussed here collectively. Fast Face-swap  views the identity swap task as a style transfer task, achieving its goals based on VGG-Net. However, this method has poor generalization. Some methods  apply the Transformer architecture to face swapping tasks. Leveraging a facial encoder based on the Swin Transformer , TransFS  obtains rich facial features, enabling facial swapping in high-resolution images. CanonSwap  introduces a motion–appearance disentangled video face swapping framework that enables accurate identity transfer while preserving fine-grained temporal dynamics.

### **Face Reenactment**

.

This section reviews current methods from four points: 3DMM-based, landmark matching, face feature decoupling, and self-supervised learning. We summarize them in <a href="#3.1.2_face_reenactment" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="3.1.2_face_reenactment">[3.1.2_face_reenactment]</a>.

$`\bullet`$ **3DMM-based.** Some methods  utilize 3DMM to construct a facial parameter model as an intermediary for transferring information between the source and target. In particular, Face2Face$`^{\rho}`$ , based on 3DMM, consists of a u-shaped rendering network driven by head pose and facial motion fields and a hierarchical coarse-to-fine motion network guided by landmarks at different scales. However, some methods  exhibit visible artifacts in the background when dealing with significant head movements in the input images. To address issues such as incomplete attribute decoupling in facial reproduction tasks, PECHead  models facial expressions and pose movements. It combines self-supervised learning of landmarks with 3D facial landmarks and introduces a new motion-aware multi-scale feature alignment module to eliminate artifacts that may arise from facial motion.

$`\bullet`$ **Landmark Matching.** This kind of methods  aim to establish a mapping relationship between semantic objects in the facial regions of the driving source and the target source through landmarks. Based on this mapping relationship , the transfer of facial movement information is achieved. To address the challenge of reproducing large head poses in facial reenactment, Xu   propose a dual-generator network incorporating a 3D landmark detector into the model. Free-headgan  comprises a 3D keypoint estimator, an eye gaze estimator, and a generator built on the HeadGAN architecture. The 3D keypoint estimator addresses the regression of deformations related to 3D poses and expressions. The eye gaze estimator controls eye movement in videos, providing finer details. MetaPortrait  achieves accurate distortion field prediction through dense facial keypoint matching and accelerates model training based on meta-learning principles, delivering excellent results on limited datasets.

$`\bullet`$ **Feature Decoupling.** The latent feature decoupling and driving methods  aims to disentangle facial features in the latent space of the driving video, replacing or mapping the corresponding latent information to achieve high-fidelity facial reproduction under specific conditions. HyperReenact  uses attribute decoupling, employing a hyper-network to refine source identity features and modify facial poses. StyleMask  separates facial pose and expression from the identity information of the source image by learning masks and blending corresponding channels in the pre-trained style space S of StyleGAN2. HiDe-NeRF  employs a deformable neural radiance field to represent a 3D scene, with a lightweight deformation module explicitly decoupling facial pose and expression attributes.

$`\bullet`$ **Self-supervised Learning.** Self-supervised learning employs supervisory signals inferred from the intrinsic structure of the data, reducing the reliance on external data labels . Oorloff   employs self-supervised methods to train an encoder, disentangling identity and facial attribute information of portrait images within the pre-defined latent space itself of a pre-trained StyleGAN2. Zhang   utilizes 3DMM to provide geometric guidance, employs pre-computed optical flow to guide motion field estimation, and relies on pre-computed occlusion maps to guide the perception and repair of occluded areas.

### **Talking Face Generation**

.

In this section, we review current methods from three perspectives: audio/text driven, multimodal conditioned, diffusion-based, and 3D-model Technologies. We also summarize them in <a href="#3.1.3_talking face method" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="3.1.3_talking face method">[3.1.3_talking face method]</a>.

$`\bullet`$ **Audio/Text Driven.** Early methods  perform poorly in terms of generalization and training complexity. After training, the models struggled to generalize to new individuals, requiring extensive conversational data for training new characters. Researchers  propose their solutions from various perspectives. However, Most of these methods prioritize generating lip movements aligned with semantic information, overlooking essential aspects like identity and style, such as head pose changes and movement control, which are crucial in natural videos. To address this, MakeItTalk  decouples input audio information by predicting facial landmarks based on audio and obtaining semantic details on facial expressions and poses from audio signals. SadTalker  extracts 3D motion coefficients for constructing a 3DMM from audio and uses this to modulate a new 3D perceptual facial rendering for generating head poses in talking videos. Additionally, some methods  propose their improvement methods, and these will not be detailed one by one. In addition, the emotional expression varies for different texts during a conversation, and vivid emotions are an essential part of real talking face videos . Recently, some methods  extend their previous approaches by incorporating matching between the driving information and corresponding emotions. EMMN  establishes an organic relationship between emotions and lip movements by extracting emotion embeddings from the audio signal, synthesizing overall facial expressions in talking faces rather than focusing solely on audio for facial expression synthesis. AMIGO  employs a sequence-to-sequence cross-modal emotion landmark generation network to generate vivid landmarks aided by audio information, ensuring that lips and emotions in the output image sequence are synchronized with the input audio. However, existing methods still lack effective control over the intensity of emotions. In addition, TalkCLIP  introduces style parameters, expanding the style categories for text-guided talking video generation. Zhong   propose a two-stage framework, incorporating appearance priors during the generation process to enhance the model’s ability to preserve attributes of the target face. DR2  explores practical strategies for reducing the training workload.

$`\bullet`$ **Multimodal Conditioned.** To generate more realistic talking videos, some methods  introduce additional modal information on top of audio-driven methods to guide facial pose and expression. GC-AVT  generates realistic talking videos by independently controlling head pose, audio information, and facial expressions. This approach introduces an expression source video, providing emotional information during the speech and the pose source video. However, the video quality falls below expectations, and it struggles to handle complex background changes. Xu   integrate text, image, and audio-emotional modalities into a unified space to complement emotional content in textual information. Multimodal approaches have significantly enhanced the vividness of generated videos, but there is still room for exploration of organically combining information driven by different sources and modalities.

$`\bullet`$ **Diffusion-based.** Recently, some methods  apply the Diffusion model to the task of talking face generation. For fine-grained talking video generation, DAE-Talker  replaces manually crafted intermediate representations, such as facial landmarks and 3DMM coefficients, with data-driven latent representations obtained from a Diffusion Autoencoder (DAE). The image decoder generates video frames based on predicted latent variables. EmoTalker  utilizes a conditional diffusion model for emotion-editable talking face generation. It introduces emotion intensity blocks and the FED dataset to enhance the model’s understanding of complex emotions. Very recently, diffusion models are gaining prominence in talking face generation tasks  and video generation tasks . Emo  directly predicts video from audio without the need for intermediate 3D components, achieving excellent results. However, the lack of explicit control signals may easily lead to unnecessary artifacts. Based on the Diffusion Transformer architecture, VASA-1  finely encodes and reconstructs facial details, constructing an expressive and well-decoupled facial latent space.

$`\bullet`$ **3D-model Technologies.** 3D models, exemplified by NeRF, are gaining traction in talking face generation . AD-NeRF  directly feeds features from the input audio signal into a conditional implicit function to generate a dynamic NeRF. AE-NeRF  employs a dual NeRF framework to separately model audio-related regions and audio-independent regions. Furthermore, some methods  adopt Tri-Plane to represent facial and audio attributes. Synctalk  models and renders head motion using a tri-plane hash representation, and then further enhances the output quality using a portrait synchronization generator. Very recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting  also been widely applied to this task. Some method  introduce 3DGS to achieve more refined facial reconstruction and motion details, aiming to address the issue of insufficient pose and expression control caused by NeRF’s implicit representation.

### **Facial Attribute Editing**

.

In this section, we review current methods chronologically, following the progression in overcoming technical challenges. Finally, we summarize methods in <a href="#tab:3.1.4_attribute_editing" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:3.1.4_attribute_editing">[tab:3.1.4_attribute_editing]</a>.

$`\bullet`$ **Comprehensive Editing.** Early facial attribute editing models  often achieve editing for a single attribute through data-driven training. For instance, Shen   propose learning the difference between pre-/post-operation images, represented as residual images, to achieve attribute-specific operations. However, single-attribute editing falls short of meeting expectations, and compression steps in the process often lead to a significant loss of image resolution, a common issue in early methods. The fundamental challenge in comprehensive editing and unrelated attribute modification is achieving complete attribute disentanglement. Many approaches  have explored this. , HifaFace  identifies cycle consistency issues as the cause of facial attribute information loss that proposes a wavelet-based method for high-fidelity face editing, while TransEditor  introduces a dual-space GAN structure based on the transformer framework that improves image quality and attribute editing flexibility.

$`\bullet`$ **Irrelevant-attribute Retained.** Another critical aspect of face editing is retaining as much target image information as possible in the generated images . GuidedStyle  leverages attention mechanisms in StyleGAN  for the adaptive selection of style modifications for different image layers. IA-FaceS  embeds the face image to be edited into two branches of the model, where one branch calculates high-dimensional component-invariant content embedding to capture facial details, and the other branch provides low-dimensional component-specific embedding for component operations. Additionally, some approaches  combine GANs with NeRF  for enhanced spatial awareness capabilities. Specifically, FENeRF  uses two decoupled latent codes to generate corresponding facial semantics and textures in a 3D volume with spatial alignment sharing the same geometry. CIPS-3D++  enhances the model’s training efficiency with a NeRF-based shallow 3D shape encoder and an MLP-based deep 2D image decoder.

$`\bullet`$ **Text Driven.** Text driven facial attribute editing is a crucial application scenario and a recent hot topic in academic research . TextFace  introduces text-to-style mapping, directly encoding text descriptions into the latent space of pre-trained StyleGAN. TG-3DFace  introduces two text-to-face cross-modal alignment techniques, including global contrastive learning and fine-grained alignment modules, to enhance the high semantic consistency.

$`\bullet`$ **Diffusion-based.** Diffusion-based models have been introduced into facial attribute editing  and achieve excellent results. Huang   propose a collaborative diffusion framework, utilizing multiple pre-trained unimodal diffusion models together for multimodal face generation and editing. DiffusionRig  conditions the initial 3D face model, which helps preserve facial identity information during personalized editing of facial appearance.

## **Forgery Detection**

In this section, we review current forgery detection techniques based on the type of detection cues, categorizing them into three: Space Domain, Time Domain, Frequency Domain, and Data-Driven. We also summarize the detailed information about popular methods in <a href="#detection method1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="detection method1">[detection method1]</a>.

### **Space Domain**

.

$`\bullet`$ **Image-level Inconsistency.** The generation process of forged images often involves partial alterations rather than global generation, leading to common local differences in non-globally generated forgery methods. Therefore, some methods focus on differences in image spatial details as criteria for determining whether an image is forged, such as color , saturation , artifacts , gradient variations , Specifically, RECCE  considers shadow generation from a training perspective, utilizing the learned representations on actual samples to identify image reconstruction differences. LGrad  utilizes a pre-trained transformation model, converting images to gradients to visualize general artifacts and subsequently classifying based on these representations. In addition, some works focus on detection based on differences in facial and non-facial regions , as well as the fine-grained details of image textures . Recently, Ba   focuse not only on the discordance in a single image region but also on the detection of fused local representation information from multiple non-overlapping areas.

$`\bullet`$**Local Noise Inconsistency.** Image forgery may involve adding, modifying, or removing content in the image, potentially altering the noise distribution in the image. Detection methods based on noise aim to identify such local or even global differences in the image. Zhou   propose a dual-stream structure, combining GoogleNet with a triplet network to focus on tampering artifacts and local noise in images. NoiseDF  specializes in identifying underlying noise traces left behind in Deepfake videos, introducing an efficient and novel Multi-Head Relative Interaction with depth-wise separable convolutions to enhance detection performance.

### **Time Domain**

.

$`\bullet`$ **Abnormal Physiological Information.** Forgery videos often overlook the authentic physiological features of humans, failing to achieve overall consistency with authentic individuals. Therefore, some methods focus on assessing the plausibility of the physiological features of the generated faces in videos. Li   detect blinking and blink frequency in videos as criteria for determining the video’s authenticity. Yang   focuses on the inconsistency of head poses in videos, comparing the differences between head poses estimated using all facial landmarks and those estimated using only the landmarks in the central region. Peng   focuse on inter-frame gaze angles, obtaining gaze characteristics of each video frame and using a spatio-temporal feature aggregator to combine temporal gaze features, spatial attribute features, and spatial texture features as the basis for detection and classification.

$`\bullet`$ **Inter-Frame Inconsistency.** Methods  based on inter-frame inconsistency for forgery detection aim to uncover differences in images between adjacent frames or frames with specific temporal spans. Gu   focuse on inter-frame image inconsistency by densely sampling adjacent frames, while Yin   design a Dynamic Fine-grained Difference Capturing module and a Multi-Scale Spatio-Temporal Aggregation module to cooperatively model spatio-temporal inconsistencies. Yang   approach forgery detection as a graph classification problem, emphasizing the relationship information between facial regions to capture the relationships among local features across different frames. Choi   discover that the style variables in each frame of Deepfake work change. Based on this, they developed a style attention module to focus on the inconsistency of the style latent variables between frames.

$`\bullet`$ **Multimodal Inconsistency.** The core idea behind multimodal detection algorithms is to make judgments based on the flow of prior information from multiple attributes rather than solely considering the image or audio differences of individual characteristics in each frame. The consideration of audio-visual modal inconsistency has received extensive research in various methods . POI-Forensics  proposes a deep forgery detection method based on audio-visual authentication, utilizing contrastive learning to learn the most distinctive embeddings for each identity in moving facial and audio segments. AVoiD-DF  embeds spatiotemporal information in a spatiotemporal encoder and employs a multimodal joint decoder to fuse multimodal features and learn their inherent relationships. Subsequently, a cross-modal classifier is applied to detect disharmonious operations within and between modalities. Agarwal   describe a forensic technique for detecting fake faces using static and dynamic auditory ear characteristics. Indeed, multimodal detection methods are currently a hotspot in forgery detection research.

### **Frequency Domain**

.

Frequency domain-based forgery detection methods transform image time-domain information into the frequency domain. Works  utilize statistical measures of periodic features, frequency components, and frequency characteristic distributions, either globally or in local regions, as evaluation metrics for forgery detection. Specifically, F$`^{3}`$-Net  proposes a dual-branch framework. One frequency-aware branch utilizes Frequency-aware Image Decomposition (FAD) to learn subtle forgery patterns in suspicious images. In contrast, the other branch aims to extract high-level semantics from Local Frequency Statistics (LFS) to describe the frequency-aware statistical differences between real and forged faces. HFI-Net  consists of a dual-branch network and four Global-Local Interaction (GLI) modules. It effectively explores multi-level frequency artifacts, obtaining frequency-related forgery clues for face detection. Tan   introduce a novel frequency-aware approach called FreqNet, which focuses on the high-frequency information of images and combines it with a frequency-domain learning module to learn source-independent features. Furthermore, some approaches combine spatial, temporal, and frequency domains for joint consideration , and Guo   design a spatial-frequency interaction convolution to construct a novel backbone network for Deepfake detection.

### **Data Driven**

.

Data-driven forgery detection  focuses on learning specific patterns and features from extensive image or video datasets to distinguish between genuine and potentially manipulated images. Some methods  believe that images generated by specific models possess unique model fingerprints. Based on this belief, forgery detection can be achieved by focusing on the model’s training. In addition, FakeSpotter  introduces the Neuron Coverage Criterion to capture layer-wise neuron activation behavior. It monitors the neural behavior of a deep face recognition system through a binary classifier to detect fake faces. There are also methods  that attempt to classify the sources of different components in an image. For instance, Huang   think that the difference between explicit and implicit identity helps detect face swapping.

## **Specific Related Domains**

### **Face Super-resolution**

.

$`\bullet`$ **Convolutional Neural Networks.** Early works  on facial super-resolution based on CNNs aims to leverage the powerful representational capabilities of CNNs to learn the mapping relationship between low-resolution and high-resolution images from training samples. Depending on whether they focus on local details of the image, they can be divided into global methods , local methods , and mixed methods .

$`\bullet`$ **Generative Adversarial Network.** GAN aims to achieve the optimal output result through an adversarial process between the generator and the discriminator. This type of method  currently dominates the field for flexible and efficient architecture.

### **Portrait Style Transfer**

.

$`\bullet`$ **Generative Adversarial Network.** The most mature style transfer algorithm is the GAN-based approach . However, due to the relatively poor stability of GANs, it is common for the generated images to contain artifacts and unreasonable components. 3DAvatarGAN  bridges the pre-trained 3D-GAN in the source domain with the 2D-GAN trained on an artistic dataset to achieve cross-domain generation. Scenimefy  utilizes semantic constraints provided by text models like CLIP to guide StyleGAN generation and applies patch-based contrastive style loss to enhance stylization and fine details further.

$`\bullet`$ **Diffusion-based.** Diffusion-based methods  represent the generative process of cross-domain image transfer using diffusion processes. DiffusionGAN3D  combines 3DGAN with a diffusion model from text to graphics, introducing relative distance loss and learnable tri-planes for specific scenarios to further enhance cross-domain transformation accuracy.

### **Body Animation**

.

$`\bullet`$ **Generative Adversarial Network.** GAN-based approaches  aim to train a model to generate images whose conditional distribution resembles the target domain, thus transferring information from reference images to target images. CASD  is based on a style distribution module using a cross-attention mechanism, facilitating pose transfer between source semantic styles and target poses. However, existing methods still rely considerably on training samples, and exhibit decreased performance when dealing with actions in rare poses.

$`\bullet`$ **Diffusion-based.** The task of body animation using diffusion models aims to utilize diffusion processes to generate the propagation and interaction of movements between body parts based on a reference source. This approach  represents a current hot topic in research and implementation. LEO  focuses on the spatiotemporal continuity between generated actions, employing the Latent Motion Diffusion Model to represent motion as a series of flow graphs during the generation process.

### **Makeup Transfer**

.

$`\bullet`$ **Graphics-based Approaches.** Before the advent of neural networks, traditional computer graphics methods  relied on image‐gradient editing and physics-based operations to interpret makeup semantics. These approaches decomposed an input image into multiple layers and warped the reference makeup image onto the target using facial landmarks. However, the reliance on manually designed operators often led to unnatural results, including visible artifacts and unintended alterations to background regions.

$`\bullet`$ **Generative Adversarial Network.** Early deep learning-based methods  aim at fully automatic makeup transfer. However, these methods  exhibit poor performance when faced with significant differences in pose and expression between the source and target faces and are unable to handle extreme makeup scenarios well. Some methods  proposes their solutions, PSGAN++  comprises the Makeup Distillation Network, Attentive Makeup Morphing module, Style Transfer Network, and Identity Extraction Network, further enhancing the ability of PSGAN  to perform targeted makeup transfer with detail preservation. ELeGANt , CUMTGAN , and HT-ASE  explore the preservation of detailed information.

## References

1. Tong Sha, Wei Zhang, Tong Shen, Zhoujun Li, and Tao Mei.
\newblock Deep person generation: A survey from the perspective of face, pose, and cloth synthesis.
\newblock {\em CSUR}, 2023.
2. Diederik~P Kingma and Max Welling.
\newblock Auto-encoding variational bayes.
\newblock {\em stat}, 2014.
3. Kihyuk Sohn, Honglak Lee, and Xinchen Yan.
\newblock Learning structured output representation using deep conditional generative models.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2015.
4. Aaron Van Den~Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et~al.
\newblock Neural discrete representation learning.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2017.
5. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila.
\newblock A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2019.
6. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
\newblock Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
7. Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, et~al.
\newblock Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2023.
8. Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Yaohui Wang, Yu~Qiao, Dahua Lin, and Bo~Dai.
\newblock Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2024.
9. Renshuai Liu, Bowen Ma, Wei Zhang, Zhipeng Hu, Changjie Fan, Tangjie Lv, Yu~Ding, and Xuan Cheng.
\newblock Towards a simultaneous and granular identity-expression control in personalized face generation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
10. Simone Barattin, Christos Tzelepis, Ioannis Patras, and Nicu Sebe.
\newblock Attribute-preserving face dataset anonymization via latent code optimization.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
11. Chao Xu, Jiangning Zhang, Miao Hua, Qian He, Zili Yi, and Yong Liu.
\newblock Region-aware face swapping.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
12. Alberto Ancilotto, Francesco Paissan, and Elisabetta Farella.
\newblock Ximswap: many-to-many face swapping for tinyml.
\newblock {\em TECS}, 2023.
13. Kaede Shiohara, Xingchao Yang, and Takafumi Taketomi.
\newblock Blendface: Re-designing identity encoders for face-swapping.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
14. Gee-Sern Hsu, Chun-Hung Tsai, and Hung-Yi Wu.
\newblock Dual-generator face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
15. Stella Bounareli, Christos Tzelepis, Vasileios Argyriou, Ioannis Patras, and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock Hyperreenact: one-shot reenactment via jointly learning to refine and retarget faces.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
16. Aaron Mir, Eduardo Alonso, and Esther Mondrag{\'o}n.
\newblock Dit-head: High-resolution talking head synthesis using diffusion transformers.
\newblock In {\em ICAART}, 2024.
17. Chenxu Zhang, Chao Wang, Yifan Zhao, Shuo Cheng, Linjie Luo, and Xiaohu Guo.
\newblock Dr2: Disentangled recurrent representation learning for data-efficient speech video synthesis.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2024.
18. Jianxin Sun, Qiyao Deng, Qi~Li, Muyi Sun, Min Ren, and Zhenan Sun.
\newblock Anyface: Free-style text-to-face synthesis and manipulation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
19. Wenjing Huang, Shikui Tu, and Lei Xu.
\newblock Ia-faces: A bidirectional method for semantic face editing.
\newblock {\em NN}, 2023.
20. Youxin Pang, Yong Zhang, Weize Quan, Yanbo Fan, Xiaodong Cun, Ying Shan, and Dong-ming Yan.
\newblock Dpe: Disentanglement of pose and expression for general video portrait editing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
21. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial nets.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2014.
22. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.
\newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2020.
23. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj{\"o}rn Ommer.
\newblock High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
24. B~Mildenhall, PP~Srinivasan, M~Tancik, JT~Barron, R~Ramamoorthi, and R~Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2020.
25. Kyle Gao, Yina Gao, Hongjie He, Dening Lu, Linlin Xu, and Jonathan Li.
\newblock Nerf: Neural radiance field in 3d vision, a comprehensive review.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2022.
26. Kaiwen Jiang, Shu-Yu Chen, Feng-Lin Liu, Hongbo Fu, and Lin Gao.
\newblock Nerffaceediting: Disentangled face editing in neural radiance fields.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, 2022.
27. Jingbo Zhang, Xiaoyu Li, Ziyu Wan, Can Wang, and Jing Liao.
\newblock Fdnerf: Few-shot dynamic neural radiance fields for face reconstruction and expression editing.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, 2022.
28. Shuaibo Li, Shibiao Xu, Wei Ma, and Qiu Zong.
\newblock Image manipulation localization using attentional cross-domain cnn features.
\newblock {\em TNNLS}, 2021.
29. Shuaibo Li, Wei Ma, Jianwei Guo, Shibiao Xu, Benchong Li, and Xiaopeng Zhang.
\newblock Unionformer: Unified-learning transformer with multi-view representation for image manipulation detection and localization.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
30. Peisong He, Haoliang Li, and Hongxia Wang.
\newblock Detection of fake images via the ensemble of deep representations from multi color spaces.
\newblock In {\em ICIP}, 2019.
31. Peng Zhou, Xintong Han, Vlad~I Morariu, and Larry~S Davis.
\newblock Two-stream neural networks for tampered face detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPRW}, 2017.
32. Qilin Yin, Wei Lu, Bin Li, and Jiwu Huang.
\newblock Dynamic difference learning with spatio-temporal correlation for deepfake video detection.
\newblock {\em TIFS}, 2023.
33. Ziming Yang, Jian Liang, Yuting Xu, Xiao-Yu Zhang, and Ran He.
\newblock Masked relation learning for deepfake detection.
\newblock {\em TIFS}, 2023.
34. Hafsa Ilyas, Ali Javed, and Khalid~Mahmood Malik.
\newblock Avfakenet: A unified end-to-end dense swin transformer deep learning model for audio--visual deepfakes detection.
\newblock {\em Applied Soft Computing}, 2023.
35. Yuyang Qian, Guojun Yin, Lu~Sheng, Zixuan Chen, and Jing Shao.
\newblock Thinking in frequency: Face forgery detection by mining frequency-aware clues.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2020.
36. Jiaming Li, Hongtao Xie, Jiahong Li, Zhongyuan Wang, and Yongdong Zhang.
\newblock Frequency-aware discriminative feature learning supervised by single-center loss for face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
37. Alexandros Haliassos, Rodrigo Mira, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Leveraging real talking faces via self-supervision for robust forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
38. Wenyuan Yang, Xiaoyu Zhou, Zhikai Chen, Bofei Guo, Zhongjie Ba, Zhihua Xia, Xiaochun Cao, and Kui Ren.
\newblock Avoid-df: Audio-visual joint learning for detecting deepfake.
\newblock {\em TIFS}, 2023.
39. Yisroel Mirsky and Wenke Lee.
\newblock The creation and detection of deepfakes: A survey.
\newblock {\em CSUR}, 2021.
40. Kishan Vyas, Preksha Pareek, Ruchi Jayaswal, and Shruti Patil.
\newblock Analysing the landscape of deep fake detection: A survey.
\newblock {\em IJISAE}, 2024.
41. Yunfan Liu, Qi~Li, Qiyao Deng, Zhenan Sun, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
\newblock Gan-based facial attribute manipulation.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2023.
42. Andrew Melnik, Maksim Miasayedzenkau, Dzianis Makaravets, Dzianis Pirshtuk, Eren Akbulut, Dennis Holzmann, Tarek Renusch, Gustav Reichert, and Helge Ritter.
\newblock Face generation and editing with stylegan: A survey.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2024.
43. Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Eric Weiss, Niru Maheswaranathan, and Surya Ganguli.
\newblock Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics.
\newblock In {\em ICML}, 2015.
44. Mehdi Mirza and Simon Osindero.
\newblock Conditional generative adversarial nets.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2014.
45. Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei~A Efros.
\newblock Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2017.
46. Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Houqiang Li, and Gang Hua.
\newblock Cvae-gan: fine-grained image generation through asymmetric training.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2017.
47. Yann LeCun, L{\'e}on Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner.
\newblock Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition.
\newblock {\em Proceedings of the IEEE}, 1998.
48. Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey~E Hinton.
\newblock Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2012.
49. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
\newblock Deep residual learning for image recognition.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2016.
50. Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie.
\newblock A convnet for the 2020s.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
51. Jiangning Zhang, Xiangtai Li, Jian Li, Liang Liu, Zhucun Xue, Boshen Zhang, Zhengkai Jiang, Tianxin Huang, Yabiao Wang, and Chengjie Wang.
\newblock Rethinking mobile block for efficient attention-based models.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
52. Jiangning Zhang, Xiangtai Li, Yabiao Wang, Chengjie Wang, Yibo Yang, Yong Liu, and Dacheng Tao.
\newblock Eatformer: Improving vision transformer inspired by evolutionary algorithm.
\newblock {\em IJCV}, 2024.
53. Ze~Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo.
\newblock Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
54. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan~N Gomez, {\L}ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.
\newblock Attention is all you need.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2017.
55. Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Unterthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, et~al.
\newblock An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2021.
56. Ze~Liu, Han Hu, Yutong Lin, Zhuliang Yao, Zhenda Xie, Yixuan Wei, Jia Ning, Yue Cao, Zheng Zhang, Li~Dong, et~al.
\newblock Swin transformer v2: Scaling up capacity and resolution.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
57. Prafull Sharma, Ayush Tewari, Yilun Du, Sergey Zakharov, Rares~Andrei Ambrus, Adrien Gaidon, William~T Freeman, Fr{\'e}do Durand, Joshua~B Tenenbaum, and Vincent Sitzmann.
\newblock Neural groundplans: Persistent neural scene representations from a single image.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2023.
58. Muhammad~Zubair Irshad, Sergey Zakharov, Katherine Liu, Vitor Guizilini, Thomas Kollar, Adrien Gaidon, Zsolt Kira, and Rares Ambrus.
\newblock Neo 360: Neural fields for sparse view synthesis of outdoor scenes.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
59. Yichen Liu, Benran Hu, Junkai Huang, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang.
\newblock Instance neural radiance field.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
60. Zhixiang Min, Bingbing Zhuang, Samuel Schulter, Buyu Liu, Enrique Dunn, and Manmohan Chandraker.
\newblock Neurocs: Neural nocs supervision for monocular 3d object localization.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
61. Sungwon Hwang, Junha Hyung, Daejin Kim, Min-Jung Kim, and Jaegul Choo.
\newblock Faceclipnerf: Text-driven 3d face manipulation using deformable neural radiance fields.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
62. Yuanbo Yang, Yifei Yang, Hanlei Guo, Rong Xiong, Yue Wang, and Yiyi Liao.
\newblock Urbangiraffe: Representing urban scenes as compositional generative neural feature fields.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
63. Gary~B Huang, Marwan Mattar, Tamara Berg, and Eric Learned-Miller.
\newblock Labeled faces in the wild: A database forstudying face recognition in unconstrained environments.
\newblock In {\em Workshop on faces in'Real-Life'Images: detection, alignment, and recognition}, 2008.
64. Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang.
\newblock Deep learning face attributes in the wild.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2015.
65. Tero Karras, Timo Aila, Samuli Laine, and Jaakko Lehtinen.
\newblock Progressive growing of gans for improved quality, stability, and variation.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2018.
66. Omkar Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Deep face recognition.
\newblock In {\em BMVC}, 2015.
67. Qiong Cao, Li~Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar~M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Vggface2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and age.
\newblock In {\em FG}, 2018.
68. Stephen Moore and Richard Bowden.
\newblock Multi-view pose and facial expression recognition.
\newblock In {\em BMVC}, 2010.
69. Arsha Nagrani, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identification dataset.
\newblock In {\em Interspecch}, 2017.
70. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock In {\em Interspecch}, 2018.
71. Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Linsen Song, Zhuoqian Yang, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He, Yu~Qiao, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face generation.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2020.
72. Weihao Xia, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, and Baoyuan Wu.
\newblock Tedigan: Text-guided diverse face image generation and manipulation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
73. Jianxin Sun, Qi~Li, Weining Wang, Jian Zhao, and Zhenan Sun.
\newblock Multi-caption text-to-face synthesis: Dataset and algorithm.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, 2021.
74. Hao Zhu, Wayne Wu, Wentao Zhu, Liming Jiang, Siwei Tang, Li~Zhang, Ziwei Liu, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Celebv-hq: A large-scale video facial attributes dataset.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
75. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video conferencing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
76. Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon~Son Chung, Andrew Senior, Oriol Vinyals, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Deep audio-visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2018.
77. Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lrs3-ted: a large-scale dataset for visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2018.
78. Yuezun Li, Ming-Ching Chang, and Siwei Lyu.
\newblock In ictu oculi: Exposing ai generated fake face videos by detecting eye blinking.
\newblock In {\em WIFS}, 2018.
79. Pavel Korshunov and S{\'e}bastien Marcel.
\newblock Deepfakes: a new threat to face recognition? assessment and detection.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2018.
80. Andreas Rossler, Davide Cozzolino, Luisa Verdoliva, Christian Riess, Justus Thies, and Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2019.
81. Liming Jiang, Ren Li, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Deeperforensics-1.0: A large-scale dataset for real-world face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
82. Brian Dolhansky, Russ Howes, Ben Pflaum, Nicole Baram, and Cristian~Canton Ferrer.
\newblock The deepfake detection challenge (dfdc) preview dataset.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2019.
83. Brian Dolhansky, Joanna Bitton, Ben Pflaum, Jikuo Lu, Russ Howes, Menglin Wang, and Cristian~Canton Ferrer.
\newblock The deepfake detection challenge (dfdc) dataset.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2020.
84. Yuezun Li, Xin Yang, Pu~Sun, Honggang Qi, and Siwei Lyu.
\newblock Celeb-df: A large-scale challenging dataset for deepfake forensics.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
85. Hasam Khalid, Shahroz Tariq, Minha Kim, and Simon~S Woo.
\newblock Fakeavceleb: A novel audio-video multimodal deepfake dataset.
\newblock {\em NeurIPS}, 2021.
86. DFD.
\newblock Dfd.
\newblock \url{https://blog.research.google/2019/09/contributing-data-to-deepfake-detection.html}, 2019.
87. Bojia Zi, Minghao Chang, Jingjing Chen, Xingjun Ma, and Yu-Gang Jiang.
\newblock Wilddeepfake: A challenging real-world dataset for deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, 2020.
88. Patrick Kwon, Jaeseong You, Gyuhyeon Nam, Sungwoo Park, and Gyeongsu Chae.
\newblock Kodf: A large-scale korean deepfake detection dataset.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
89. Xin Yang, Yuezun Li, and Siwei Lyu.
\newblock Exposing deep fakes using inconsistent head poses.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP}, 2019.
90. Kartik Narayan, Harsh Agarwal, Kartik Thakral, Surbhi Mittal, Mayank Vatsa, and Richa Singh.
\newblock Deephy: On deepfake phylogeny.
\newblock In {\em IJCB}, 2022.
91. Kartik Narayan, Harsh Agarwal, Kartik Thakral, Surbhi Mittal, Mayank Vatsa, and Richa Singh.
\newblock Df-platter: multi-face heterogeneous deepfake dataset.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
92. Jianrong Wang, Yaxin Zhao, Hongkai Fan, Tianyi Xu, Qi~Li, Sen Li, and Li~Liu.
\newblock Memory-augmented contrastive learning for talking head generation.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP}, 2023.
93. Zhou Wang, Alan~C Bovik, Hamid~R Sheikh, and Eero~P Simoncelli.
\newblock Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity.
\newblock {\em TIP}, 2004.
94. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei~A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang.
\newblock The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2018.
95. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2017.
96. Miko{\l}aj Bi{\'n}kowski, Danica~J Sutherland, Michael Arbel, and Arthur Gretton.
\newblock Demystifying mmd gans.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2018.
97. Hao Wang, Yitong Wang, Zheng Zhou, Xing Ji, Dihong Gong, Jingchao Zhou, Zhifeng Li, and Wei Liu.
\newblock Cosface: Large margin cosine loss for deep face recognition.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2018.
98. Bindita Chaudhuri, Noranart Vesdapunt, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Joint face detection and facial motion retargeting for multiple faces.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2019.
99. Nataniel Ruiz, Eunji Chong, and James~M Rehg.
\newblock Fine-grained head pose estimation without keypoints.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2018.
100. Lele Chen, Zhiheng Li, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Lip movements generation at a glance.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2018.
101. KR~Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV~Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, 2020.
102. Binh~M Le and Simon~S Woo.
\newblock Quality-agnostic deepfake detection with intra-model collaborative learning.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
103. Junke Wang, Zuxuan Wu, Wenhao Ouyang, Xintong Han, Jingjing Chen, Yu-Gang Jiang, and Ser-Nam Li.
\newblock M2tr: Multi-modal multi-scale transformers for deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em ICML}, 2022.
104. Baojin Huang, Zhongyuan Wang, Jifan Yang, Jiaxin Ai, Qin Zou, Qian Wang, and Dengpan Ye.
\newblock Implicit identity driven deepfake face swapping detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
105. Chuangchuang Tan, Yao Zhao, Shikui Wei, Guanghua Gu, and Yunchao Wei.
\newblock Learning on gradients: Generalized artifacts representation for gan-generated images detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
106. Xinru Chen, Chengbo Dong, Jiaqi Ji, Juan Cao, and Xirong Li.
\newblock Image manipulation detection by multi-view multi-scale supervision.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
107. Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li~Fei-Fei.
\newblock Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2016.
108. Changyong Shu, Hemao Wu, Hang Zhou, Jiaming Liu, Zhibin Hong, Changxing Ding, Junyu Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Few-shot head swapping in the wild.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
109. Yue Han, Jiangning Zhang, Junwei Zhu, Xiangtai Li, Yanhao Ge, Wei Li, Chengjie Wang, Yong Liu, Xiaoming Liu, and Ying Tai.
\newblock A generalist facex via learning unified facial representation.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2023.
110. Jiangning Zhang, Chao Xu, Jian Li, Yue Han, Yabiao Wang, Ying Tai, and Yong Liu.
\newblock Scsnet: An efficient paradigm for learning simultaneously image colorization and super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2022.
111. Brian~B Moser, Federico Raue, Stanislav Frolov, Sebastian Palacio, J{\"o}rn Hees, and Andreas Dengel.
\newblock Hitchhiker's guide to super-resolution: Introduction and recent advances.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2023.
112. Ryota Natsume and Yatagawa.
\newblock Rsgan: face swapping and editing using face and hair representation in latent spaces.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, 2018.
113. Qianru Sun, Ayush Tewari, Weipeng Xu, Mario Fritz, Christian Theobalt, and Bernt Schiele.
\newblock A hybrid model for identity obfuscation by face replacement.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2018.
114. Bo~Fan, Lijuan Wang, and Frank~K Soong.
\newblock Photo-real talking head with deep bidirectional lstm.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP}, 2015.
115. Lele Chen, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic pixel-wise loss.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2019.
116. Yangyang Xu, Bailin Deng, Junle Wang, Yanqing Jing, Jia Pan, and Shengfeng He.
\newblock High-resolution face swapping via latent semantics disentanglement.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
117. Huaibo Huang, Ran He, Zhenan Sun, and Tieniu Tan.
\newblock Wavelet-srnet: A wavelet-based cnn for multi-scale face super resolution.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2017.
118. Zhibo Chen, Jianxin Lin, Tiankuang Zhou, and Feng Wu.
\newblock Sequential gating ensemble network for noise robust multiscale face restoration.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on cybernetics}, 2019.
119. Chaofeng Chen, Dihong Gong, Hao Wang, Zhifeng Li, and Kwan-Yee~K Wong.
\newblock Learning spatial attention for face super-resolution.
\newblock {\em TIP}, 2020.
120. Shanlei Ko and Bi-Ru Dai.
\newblock Multi-laplacian gan with edge enhancement for face super resolution.
\newblock In {\em ICPR}, 2021.
121. Brian~B Moser, Arundhati~S Shanbhag, Federico Raue, Stanislav Frolov, Sebastian Palacio, and Andreas Dengel.
\newblock Diffusion models, image super-resolution and everything: A survey.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
122. Yukai Shi, Guanbin Li, Qingxing Cao, Keze Wang, and Liang Lin.
\newblock Face hallucination by attentive sequence optimization with reinforcement learning.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2019.
123. Kui Jiang, Zhongyuan Wang, Peng Yi, Guangcheng Wang, Ke~Gu, and Junjun Jiang.
\newblock Atmfn: Adaptive-threshold-based multi-model fusion network for compressed face hallucination.
\newblock {\em TMM}, 2019.
124. Araceli Morales, Gemma Piella, and Federico~M Sukno.
\newblock Survey on 3d face reconstruction from uncalibrated images.
\newblock {\em Computer Science Review}, 2021.
125. Sahil Sharma and Vijay Kumar.
\newblock 3d face reconstruction in deep learning era: A survey.
\newblock {\em ACME}, 2022.
126. Fabio Maninchedda, Martin~R Oswald, and Marc Pollefeys.
\newblock Fast 3d reconstruction of faces with glasses.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2017.
127. Jiangke Lin, Yi~Yuan, Tianjia Shao, and Kun Zhou.
\newblock Towards high-fidelity 3d face reconstruction from in-the-wild images using graph convolutional networks.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
128. Mingtao Feng, Syed~Zulqarnain Gilani, Yaonan Wang, and Ajmal Mian.
\newblock 3d face reconstruction from light field images: A model-free approach.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2018.
129. Shubham Tulsiani, Tinghui Zhou, Alexei~A Efros, and Jitendra Malik.
\newblock Multi-view supervision for single-view reconstruction via differentiable ray consistency.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2017.
130. Yifan Xing, Rahul Tewari, and Paulo Mendonca.
\newblock A self-supervised bootstrap method for single-image 3d face reconstruction.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2019.
131. Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman and Ronen Basri.
\newblock 3d face reconstruction from a single image using a single reference face shape.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2010.
132. Luo Jiang, Juyong Zhang, Bailin Deng, Hao Li, and Ligang Liu.
\newblock 3d face reconstruction with geometry details from a single image.
\newblock {\em TIP}, 2018.
133. Pengfei Dou, Shishir~K Shah, and Ioannis~A Kakadiaris.
\newblock End-to-end 3d face reconstruction with deep neural networks.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2017.
134. Bindita Chaudhuri, Noranart Vesdapunt, Linda Shapiro, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Personalized face modeling for improved face reconstruction and motion retargeting.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2020.
135. Xiaobo Zhang, Donghai Zhai, Tianrui Li, Yuxin Zhou, and Yang Lin.
\newblock Image inpainting based on deep learning: A review.
\newblock {\em Information Fusion}, 2023.
136. Ahmet~Burak Yildirim, Hamza Pehlivan, Bahri~Batuhan Bilecen, and Aysegul Dundar.
\newblock Diverse inpainting and editing with gan inversion.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
137. Meili Zhou, Xiangzhen Liu, Tingting Yi, Zongwen Bai, and Pei Zhang.
\newblock A superior image inpainting scheme using transformer-based self-supervised attention gan model.
\newblock {\em Expert Systems with Applications}, 2023.
138. Jianjin Xu, Saman Motamed, Praneetha Vaddamanu, Chen~Henry Wu, Christian Haene, Jean-Charles Bazin, and Fernando De~la Torre.
\newblock Personalized face inpainting with diffusion models by parallel visual attention.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2024.
139. Peiqing Yang, Shangchen Zhou, Qingyi Tao, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Pgdiff: Guiding diffusion models for versatile face restoration via partial guidance.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2024.
140. Wing-Yin Yu, Lai-Man Po, Ray~CC Cheung, Yuzhi Zhao, Yu~Xue, and Kun Li.
\newblock Bidirectionally deformable motion modulation for video-based human pose transfer.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
141. Xinyue Zhou, Mingyu Yin, Xinyuan Chen, Li~Sun, Changxin Gao, and Qingli Li.
\newblock Cross attention based style distribution for controllable person image synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
142. Jian Zhao and Hui Zhang.
\newblock Thin-plate spline motion model for image animation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
143. Yaohui Wang, Xin Ma, Xinyuan Chen, Antitza Dantcheva, Bo~Dai, and Yu~Qiao.
\newblock Leo: Generative latent image animator for human video synthesis.
\newblock {\em IJCV}, 2025.
144. Yue Ma, Yingqing He, Xiaodong Cun, Xintao Wang, Ying Shan, Xiu Li, and Qifeng Chen.
\newblock Follow your pose: Pose-guided text-to-video generation using pose-free videos.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
145. Tan Wang, Linjie Li, Kevin Lin, Chung-Ching Lin, Zhengyuan Yang, Hanwang Zhang, Zicheng Liu, and Lijuan Wang.
\newblock Disco: Disentangled control for referring human dance generation in real world.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
146. Zhongcong Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Jun~Hao Liew, Hanshu Yan, Jia-Wei Liu, Chenxu Zhang, Jiashi Feng, and Mike~Zheng Shou.
\newblock Magicanimate: Temporally consistent human image animation using diffusion model.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
147. Shuai Yang, Liming Jiang, Ziwei Liu, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Vtoonify: Controllable high-resolution portrait video style transfer.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 2022.
148. Xu~Peng, Junwei Zhu, Boyuan Jiang, Ying Tai, Donghao Luo, Jiangning Zhang, Wei Lin, Taisong Jin, Chengjie Wang, and Rongrong Ji.
\newblock Portraitbooth: A versatile portrait model for fast identity-preserved personalization.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
149. Qiang Cai, Mengxu Ma, Chen Wang, and Haisheng Li.
\newblock Image neural style transfer: A review.
\newblock {\em Computers and Electrical Engineering}, 2023.
150. Juan~C P{\'e}rez, Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Chen Cao, Artsiom Sanakoyeu, Tomas Simon, Pablo Arbel{\'a}ez, Bernard Ghanem, Ali Thabet, and Albert Pumarola.
\newblock Styleavatar: Stylizing animatable head avatars.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2024.
151. Jianwei Feng and Prateek Singhal.
\newblock 3d face style transfer with a hybrid solution of nerf and mesh rasterization.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2024.
152. Rameen Abdal, Hsin-Ying Lee, Peihao Zhu, Menglei Chai, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Peter Wonka, and Sergey Tulyakov.
\newblock 3davatargan: Bridging domains for personalized editable avatars.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
153. Shiyao Xu, Lingzhi Li, Li~Shen, Yifang Men, and Zhouhui Lian.
\newblock Your3demoji: Creating personalized emojis via one-shot 3d-aware cartoon avatar synthesis.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, 2022.
154. Yuxin Jiang, Liming Jiang, Shuai Yang, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Scenimefy: Learning to craft anime scene via semi-supervised image-to-image translation.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
155. Jin Liu, Huaibo Huang, Chao Jin, and Ran He.
\newblock Portrait diffusion: Training-free face stylization with chain-of-painting.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2023.
156. Jiwan Hur, Jaehyun Choi, Gyojin Han, Dong-Jae Lee, and Junmo Kim.
\newblock Expanding expressiveness of diffusion models with limited data via self-distillation based fine-tuning.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2024.
157. Wentao Jiang, Si~Liu, Chen Gao, Jie Cao, Ran He, Jiashi Feng, and Shuicheng Yan.
\newblock Psgan: Pose and expression robust spatial-aware gan for customizable makeup transfer.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
158. Mingxiu Li, Wei Yu, Qinglin Liu, Zonglin Li, Ru~Li, Bineng Zhong, and Shengping Zhang.
\newblock Hybrid transformers with attention-guided spatial embeddings for makeup transfer and removal.
\newblock {\em TCSVT}, 2023.
159. Huiwen Chang, Jingwan Lu, Fisher Yu, and Adam Finkelstein.
\newblock Pairedcyclegan: Asymmetric style transfer for applying and removing makeup.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2018.
160. Qiao Gu, Guanzhi Wang, Mang~Tik Chiu, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang.
\newblock Ladn: Local adversarial disentangling network for facial makeup and de-makeup.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2019.
161. Si~Liu, Wentao Jiang, Chen Gao, Ran He, Jiashi Feng, Bo~Li, and Shuicheng Yan.
\newblock Psgan++: robust detail-preserving makeup transfer and removal.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2021.
162. Xiaojing Zhong, Xinyi Huang, Zhonghua Wu, Guosheng Lin, and Qingyao Wu.
\newblock Sara: Controllable makeup transfer with spatial alignment and region-adaptive normalization.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2023.
163. Chenyu Yang, Wanrong He, Yingqing Xu, and Yang Gao.
\newblock Elegant: Exquisite and locally editable gan for makeup transfer.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
164. Qixin Yan, Chunle Guo, Jixin Zhao, Yuekun Dai, Chen~Change Loy, and Chongyi Li.
\newblock Beautyrec: Robust, efficient, and component-specific makeup transfer.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
165. Miao Hao, Guanghua Gu, Hao Fu, Chang Liu, and Dong Cui.
\newblock Cumtgan: An instance-level controllable u-net gan for facial makeup transfer.
\newblock {\em Knowledge-Based Systems}, 2022.
166. Sicong Han, Chenhao Lin, Chao Shen, Qian Wang, and Xiaohong Guan.
\newblock Interpreting adversarial examples in deep learning: A review.
\newblock {\em CSUR}, 2023.
167. Chaoran Yuan, Xiaobin Liu, and Zhengyuan Zhang.
\newblock The current status and progress of adversarial examples attacks.
\newblock In {\em CISCE}, 2021.
168. \url{https://blog.youtube/inside-youtube/}.
\newblock Accessed: Nov.19, 2025.
169. \url{https://baijiahao.baidu.com/s?id=1810168520550712093&wfr=spider&for=pc}.
\newblock Accessed: Nov.19, 2025.
170. \url{https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/regulatory-framework-ai}.
\newblock Accessed: Nov.19, 2025.
171. \url{https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/digital-services-act-package}.
\newblock Accessed: Nov.19, 2025.
172. \url{https://www.cac.gov.cn/2022-12/11/c_1672221949354811.htm}.
\newblock Accessed: Nov.19, 2025.
173. Volker Blanz and et~al. Scherbaum, Kristina.
\newblock Exchanging faces in images.
\newblock In {\em Eurographics}, 2004.
174. Dmitri Bitouk, Neeraj Kumar, Samreen Dhillon, Peter Belhumeur, and Shree~K Nayar.
\newblock Face swapping: automatically replacing faces in photographs.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, 2008.
175. Kalyan Sunkavalli, Micah~K Johnson, Wojciech Matusik, and Hanspeter Pfister.
\newblock Multi-scale image harmonization.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 2010.
176. Kevin Dale, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Micah~K Johnson, Daniel Vlasic, Wojciech Matusik, and Hanspeter Pfister.
\newblock Video face replacement.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, 2011.
177. Yuan Lin, Shengjin Wang, Qian Lin, and Feng Tang.
\newblock Face swapping under large pose variations: A 3d model based approach.
\newblock In {\em ICME}, 2012.
178. Jianke Zhu, Luc Van~Gool, and Steven~CH Hoi.
\newblock Unsupervised face alignment by robust nonrigid mapping.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2009.
179. Saleh Mosaddegh, Loic Simon, and Fr{\'e}d{\'e}ric Jurie.
\newblock Photorealistic face de-identification by aggregating donors’ face components.
\newblock In {\em ACCV}, 2015.
180. Ralph Gross, Iain Matthews, Jeffrey Cohn, Takeo Kanade, and Simon Baker.
\newblock Multi-pie.
\newblock {\em IVC}, 2010.
181. Stephen Milborrow, John Morkel, and Fred Nicolls.
\newblock The muct landmarked face database.
\newblock {\em PRASA}, 2010.
182. Yuval Nirkin, Iacopo Masi, Anh~Tran Tuan, Tal Hassner, and Gerard Medioni.
\newblock On face segmentation, face swapping, and face perception.
\newblock In {\em FG}, 2018.
183. Xavier~P Burgos-Artizzu, Pietro Perona, and Piotr Doll{\'a}r.
\newblock Robust face landmark estimation under occlusion.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2013.
184. Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Houqiang Li, and Gang Hua.
\newblock Towards open-set identity preserving face synthesis.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2018.
185. Yandong Guo, Lei Zhang, Yuxiao Hu, Xiaodong He, and Jianfeng Gao.
\newblock Ms-celeb-1m: A dataset and benchmark for large-scale face recognition.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2016.
186. Ning Zhang, Manohar Paluri, Yaniv Taigman, Rob Fergus, and Lubomir Bourdev.
\newblock Beyond frontal faces: Improving person recognition using multiple cues.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2015.
187. Yuval Nirkin, Yosi Keller, and Tal Hassner.
\newblock Fsgan: Subject agnostic face swapping and reenactment.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2019.
188. Brianna Maze, Jocelyn Adams, James~A Duncan, Nathan Kalka, Tim Miller, Charles Otto, Anil~K Jain, W~Tyler Niggel, Janet Anderson, Jordan Cheney, et~al.
\newblock Iarpa janus benchmark-c: Face dataset and protocol.
\newblock In {\em ICB}, 2018.
189. Lingzhi Li, Jianmin Bao, Hao Yang, Dong Chen, and Fang Wen.
\newblock Faceshifter: Towards high fidelity and occlusion aware face swapping.
\newblock {\em CVPR}, 2020.
190. Bingquan Zhu, Hao Fang, Yanan Sui, and Luming Li.
\newblock Deepfakes for medical video de-identification: Privacy protection and diagnostic information preservation.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2020.
191. Renwang Chen, Xuanhong Chen, Bingbing Ni, and Yanhao Ge.
\newblock Simswap: An efficient framework for high fidelity face swapping.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, 2020.
192. Yuhao Zhu, Qi~Li, Jian Wang, Cheng-Zhong Xu, and Zhenan Sun.
\newblock One shot face swapping on megapixels.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
193. Yuhan Wang, Xu~Chen, Junwei Zhu, Wenqing Chu, Ying Tai, Chengjie Wang, Jilin Li, Yongjian Wu, Feiyue Huang, and Rongrong Ji.
\newblock Hififace: 3d shape and semantic prior guided high fidelity face swapping.
\newblock In {\em IJCAI}, 2021.
194. Yuval Nirkin, Yosi Keller, and Tal Hassner.
\newblock Fsganv2: Improved subject agnostic face swapping and reenactment.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2022.
195. Jiseob Kim, Jihoon Lee, and Byoung-Tak Zhang.
\newblock Smooth-swap: a simple enhancement for face-swapping with smoothness.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
196. Yixuan Li, Chao Ma, Yichao Yan, Wenhan Zhu, and Xiaokang Yang.
\newblock 3d-aware face swapping.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
197. Hao Zeng, Wei Zhang, Changjie Fan, Tangjie Lv, Suzhen Wang, Zhimeng Zhang, Bowen Ma, Lincheng Li, Yu~Ding, and Xin Yu.
\newblock Flowface: Semantic flow-guided shape-aware face swapping.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2023.
198. Fengyuan Liu, Lingyun Yu, Hongtao Xie, Chuanbin Liu, Zhiguo Ding, Quanwei Yang, and Yongdong Zhang.
\newblock High fidelity face swapping via semantics disentanglement and structure enhancement.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, 2023.
199. Yixuan Zhu, Wenliang Zhao, Yansong Tang, Yongming Rao, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Stableswap: Stable face swapping in a shared and controllable latent space.
\newblock {\em TMM}, 2024.
200. Wenliang Zhao, Yongming Rao, Weikang Shi, Zuyan Liu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Diffswap: High-fidelity and controllable face swapping via 3d-aware masked diffusion.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
201. Kihong Kim, Yunho Kim, Seokju Cho, Junyoung Seo, Jisu Nam, Kychul Lee, Seungryong Kim, and KwangHee Lee.
\newblock Diffface: Diffusion-based face swapping with facial guidance.
\newblock {\em Pattern Recognition}, 163:111451, 2025.
202. Sanoojan Baliah, Qinliang Lin, Shengcai Liao, Xiaodan Liang, and Muhammad~Haris Khan.
\newblock Realistic and efficient face swapping: A unified approach with diffusion models.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2025.
203. Taewoo Kim, Geonsu Lee, Hyukgi Lee, Seongtae Kim, and Younggun Lee.
\newblock Pixswap: High-resolution face swapping for effective reflection of identity via pixel-level supervision with synthetic paired dataset.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2025.
204. Kaiwen Cui, Rongliang Wu, Fangneng Zhan, and Shijian Lu.
\newblock Face transformer: Towards high fidelity and accurate face swapping.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
205. Wei Cao, Tianyi Wang, Anming Dong, and Minglei Shu.
\newblock Transfs: Face swapping using transformer.
\newblock In {\em FG}, 2023.
206. Tianyi Wang, Zian Li, Ruixia Liu, Yinglong Wang, and Liqiang Nie.
\newblock An efficient attribute-preserving framework for face swapping.
\newblock {\em TMM}, 2024.
207. Xiangyang Luo, Ye~Zhu, Yunfei Liu, Lijian Lin, Cong Wan, Zijian Cai, Yu~Li, and Shao-Lun Huang.
\newblock Canonswap: High-fidelity and consistent video face swapping via canonical space modulation.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2025.
208. Han Guo, Dongmei Niu, and Xiangyu Kong.
\newblock Face replacement based on 2d dense mapping.
\newblock In {\em ICIGP}, 2019.
209. Joel Ruben~Antony Moniz, Christopher Beckham, Simon Rajotte, Sina Honari, and Chris Pal.
\newblock Unsupervised depth estimation, 3d face rotation and replacement.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2018.
210. Kunlin Liu, Ivan Perov, Daiheng Gao, Nikolay Chervoniy, Wenbo Zhou, and Weiming Zhang.
\newblock Deepfacelab: Integrated, flexible and extensible face-swapping framework.
\newblock {\em PR}, 2023.
211. Chao Xu, Jiangning Zhang, Yue Han, Guanzhong Tian, Xianfang Zeng, Ying Tai, Yabiao Wang, Chengjie Wang, and Yong Liu.
\newblock Designing one unified framework for high-fidelity face reenactment and swapping.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
212. Diqiong Jiang, Dan Song, Ruofeng Tong, and Min Tang.
\newblock Styleipsb: Identity-preserving semantic basis of stylegan for high fidelity face swapping.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
213. Xiaohang Ren, Xingyu Chen, Pengfei Yao, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Reinforced disentanglement for face swapping without skip connection.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
214. Yu~Zhang, Hao Zeng, Bowen Ma, Wei Zhang, Zhimeng Zhang, Yu~Ding, Tangjie Lv, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flowface++: Explicit semantic flow-supervised end-to-end face swapping.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2023.
215. Zhian Liu, Maomao Li, Yong Zhang, Cairong Wang, Qi~Zhang, Jue Wang, and Yongwei Nie.
\newblock Fine-grained face swapping via regional gan inversion.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
216. Felix Rosberg, Eren~Erdal Aksoy, Fernando Alonso-Fernandez, and Cristofer Englund.
\newblock Facedancer: pose-and occlusion-aware high fidelity face swapping.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2023.
217. Gege Gao, Huaibo Huang, Chaoyou Fu, Zhaoyang Li, and Ran He.
\newblock Information bottleneck disentanglement for identity swapping.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
218. Zhiliang Xu, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Ziwei Liu, Jiaming Liu, Zhizhi Guo, Junyu Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Styleswap: Style-based generator empowers robust face swapping.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
219. Sahng-Min Yoo, Tae-Min Choi, Jae-Woo Choi, and Jong-Hwan Kim.
\newblock Fastswap: A lightweight one-stage framework for real-time face swapping.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2023.
220. Iryna Korshunova, Wenzhe Shi, Joni Dambre, and Lucas Theis.
\newblock Fast face-swap using convolutional neural networks.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2017.
221. Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Ayush Tewari, Weipeng Xu, Justus Thies, Matthias Niessner, Patrick P{\'e}rez, Christian Richardt, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, and Christian Theobalt.
\newblock Deep video portraits.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 2018.
222. Hyeongwoo Kim, Mohamed Elgharib, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, Hans-Peter Seidel, Thabo Beeler, Christian Richardt, and Christian Theobalt.
\newblock Neural style-preserving visual dubbing.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 2019.
223. Michail~Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia Sharmanska.
\newblock Headgan: One-shot neural head synthesis and editing.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
224. Kewei Yang, Kang Chen, Daoliang Guo, Song-Hai Zhang, Yuan-Chen Guo, and Weidong Zhang.
\newblock Face2face $\rho$: Real-time high-resolution one-shot face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
225. Yue Gao, Yuan Zhou, Jinglu Wang, Xiao Li, Xiang Ming, and Yan Lu.
\newblock High-fidelity and freely controllable talking head video generation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
226. Tina Behrouzi, Atefeh Shahroudnejad, and Payam Mousavi.
\newblock Maskrenderer: 3d-infused multi-mask realistic face reenactment.
\newblock {\em PR}, 2025.
227. Egor Zakharov, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Burkov, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Few-shot adversarial learning of realistic neural talking head models.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2019.
228. Jiangning Zhang, Xianfang Zeng, Mengmeng Wang, Yusu Pan, Liang Liu, Yong Liu, Yu~Ding, and Fan.
\newblock Freenet: Multi-identity face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
229. Michail~Christos Doukas, Evangelos Ververas, Viktoriia Sharmanska, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
\newblock Free-headgan: Neural talking head synthesis with explicit gaze control.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2023.
230. Petr Kellnhofer, Adria Recasens, Simon Stent, Wojciech Matusik, and Antonio Torralba.
\newblock Gaze360: Physically unconstrained gaze estimation in the wild.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2019.
231. Xucong Zhang, Yusuke Sugano, Mario Fritz, and Andreas Bulling.
\newblock Appearance-based gaze estimation in the wild.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2015.
232. Bowen Zhang, Chenyang Qi, Pan Zhang, Bo~Zhang, HsiangTao Wu, Dong Chen, Qifeng Chen, Yong Wang, and Fang Wen.
\newblock Metaportrait: Identity-preserving talking head generation with fast personalized adaptation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
233. Songlin Yang, Wei Wang, Yushi Lan, Xiangyu Fan, Bo~Peng, Lei Yang, and Jing Dong.
\newblock Learning dense correspondence for nerf-based face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
234. Andre Rochow, Max Schwarz, and Sven Behnke.
\newblock Fsrt: Facial scene representation transformer for face reenactment from factorized appearance, head-pose, and facial expression features.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
235. Stella Bounareli, Christos Tzelepis, Vasileios Argyriou, Ioannis Patras, and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock Diffusionact: Controllable diffusion autoencoder for one-shot face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em FG}, 2025.
236. Weichuang Li, Longhao Zhang, Dong Wang, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Mulin Chen, Bang Zhang, Zhongjian Wang, Liefeng Bo, and Xuelong Li.
\newblock One-shot high-fidelity talking-head synthesis with deformable neural radiance field.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
237. Stella Bounareli, Christos Tzelepis, Vasileios Argyriou, Ioannis Patras, and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock Stylemask: Disentangling the style space of stylegan2 for neural face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em FG}, 2023.
238. S~Bounareli, C~Tzelepis, V~Argyriou, and I~Patras.
\newblock One-shot neural face reenactment via finding directions in gan's latent space.
\newblock {\em IJCV}, 2024.
239. Qing Chang, Yao-Xiang Ding, and Kun Zhou.
\newblock Enhancing identity-deformation disentanglement in stylegan for one-shot face video re-enactment.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2025.
240. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu~Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
241. Soumya Tripathy, Juho Kannala, and Esa Rahtu.
\newblock Icface: Interpretable and controllable face reenactment using gans.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2020.
242. Trevine Oorloff and Yaser Yacoob.
\newblock Robust one-shot face video re-enactment using hybrid latent spaces of stylegan2.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
243. Han Xue, Jun Ling, Anni Tang, Li~Song, Rong Xie, and Wenjun Zhang.
\newblock High-fidelity face reenactment via identity-matched correspondence learning.
\newblock {\em TOMM}, 2023.
244. Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Face2face: Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2016.
245. Olivia Wiles, A~Koepke, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock X2face: A network for controlling face generation using images, audio, and pose codes.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2018.
246. Egor Zakharov, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Aliaksandra Shysheya, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Fast bi-layer neural synthesis of one-shot realistic head avatars.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2020.
247. Sungjoo Ha, Martin Kersner, Beomsu Kim, Seokjun Seo, and Dongyoung Kim.
\newblock Marionette: Few-shot face reenactment preserving identity of unseen targets.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2020.
248. Martin Cooke, Jon Barker, Stuart Cunningham, and Xu~Shao.
\newblock An audio-visual corpus for speech perception and automatic speech recognition.
\newblock {\em JASA}, 2006.
249. Carolyn Richie, Sarah Warburton, and Megan Carter.
\newblock Audiovisual database of spoken american english.
\newblock {\em LDC}, 2009.
250. Hang Zhou, Yu~Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang.
\newblock Talking face generation by adversarially disentangled audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2019.
251. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 2020.
252. Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xun Cao, and Feng Xu.
\newblock Audio-driven emotional video portraits.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
253. Siddharth Gururani, Arun Mallya, Ting-Chun Wang, Rafael Valle, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock Space: Speech-driven portrait animation with controllable expression.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
254. Wenxuan Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Xuan Wang, Yong Zhang, Xi~Shen, Yu~Guo, Ying Shan, and Fei Wang.
\newblock Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
255. Ziqiao Peng, Haoyu Wu, Zhenbo Song, Hao Xu, Xiangyu Zhu, Jun He, Hongyan Liu, and Zhaoxin Fan.
\newblock Emotalk: Speech-driven emotional disentanglement for 3d face animation.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
256. Jiadong Wang, Xinyuan Qian, Malu Zhang, Robby~T Tan, and Haizhou Li.
\newblock Seeing what you said: Talking face generation guided by a lip reading expert.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
257. Dongyeun Lee, Chaewon Kim, Sangjoon Yu, Jaejun Yoo, and Gyeong-Moon Park.
\newblock Radio: Reference-agnostic dubbing video synthesis.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2024.
258. Xingjian Diao, Ming Cheng, Wayner Barrios, and SouYoung Jin.
\newblock Ft2tf: First-person statement text-to-talking face generation.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2025.
259. Yifeng Ma, Suzhen Wang, Yu~Ding, Bowen Ma, Tangjie Lv, Changjie Fan, Zhipeng Hu, Zhidong Deng, and Xin Yu.
\newblock Talkclip: Talking head generation with text-guided expressive speaking styles.
\newblock {\em TMM}, 2025.
260. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
261. Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual control.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
262. Lingyun Yu, Hongtao Xie, and Yongdong Zhang.
\newblock Multimodal learning for temporally coherent talking face generation with articulator synergy.
\newblock {\em TMM}, 2021.
263. Chao Xu, Junwei Zhu, Jiangning Zhang, Yue Han, Wenqing Chu, Ying Tai, Chengjie Wang, Zhifeng Xie, and Yong Liu.
\newblock High-fidelity generalized emotional talking face generation with multi-modal emotion space learning.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
264. Jiayu Wang, Kang Zhao, Shiwei Zhang, Yingya Zhang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou.
\newblock Lipformer: High-fidelity and generalizable talking face generation with a pre-learned facial codebook.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
265. Suzhen Wang, Yifeng Ma, Yu~Ding, Zhipeng Hu, Changjie Fan, Tangjie Lv, Zhidong Deng, and Xin Yu.
\newblock Styletalk++: A unified framework for controlling the speaking styles of talking heads.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2024.
266. Chenpeng Du, Qi~Chen, Tianyu He, Xu~Tan, Xie Chen, Kai Yu, Sheng Zhao, and Jiang Bian.
\newblock Dae-talker: High fidelity speech-driven talking face generation with diffusion autoencoder.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, 2023.
267. Zhentao Yu, Zixin Yin, Deyu Zhou, Duomin Wang, Finn Wong, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Talking head generation with probabilistic audio-to-visual diffusion priors.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
268. Micha{\l} Stypu{\l}kowski, Konstantinos Vougioukas, Sen He, Maciej Zi{\k{e}}ba, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Diffused heads: Diffusion models beat gans on talking-face generation.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2024.
269. Bingyuan Zhang, Xulong Zhang, Ning Cheng, Jun Yu, Jing Xiao, and Jianzong Wang.
\newblock Emotalker: Emotionally editable talking face generation via diffusion model.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP}, 2024.
270. Sicheng Xu, Guojun Chen, Yu-Xiao Guo, Jiaolong Yang, Chong Li, Zhenyu Zang, Yizhong Zhang, Xin Tong, and Baining Guo.
\newblock Vasa-1: Lifelike audio-driven talking faces generated in real time.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2024.
271. Haotian Wang, Yuzhe Weng, Yueyan Li, Zilu Guo, Jun Du, Shutong Niu, Jiefeng Ma, Shan He, Xiaoyan Wu, Qiming Hu, et~al.
\newblock Emotivetalk: Expressive talking head generation through audio information decoupling and emotional video diffusion.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2025.
272. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
273. Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Yueqi Duan, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot talking head synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
274. Dongze Li, Kang Zhao, Wei Wang, Bo~Peng, Yingya Zhang, Jing Dong, and Tieniu Tan.
\newblock Ae-nerf: Audio enhanced neural radiance field for few shot talking head synthesis.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
275. Ziqiao Peng, Wentao Hu, Yue Shi, Xiangyu Zhu, Xiaomei Zhang, Hao Zhao, Jun He, Hongyan Liu, and Zhaoxin Fan.
\newblock Synctalk: The devil is in the synchronization for talking head synthesis.
\newblock In {\em CVPR'24}, 2024.
276. Zhenhui Ye, Tianyun Zhong, Yi~Ren, Jiaqi Yang, Weichuang Li, Jiawei Huang, Ziyue Jiang, Jinzheng He, Rongjie Huang, Jinglin Liu, et~al.
\newblock Real3d-portrait: One-shot realistic 3d talking portrait synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2024.
277. Jiaxiang Tang, Kaisiyuan Wang, Hang Zhou, Xiaokang Chen, Dongliang He, Tianshu Hu, Jingtuo Liu, Ziwei Liu, and Gang Zeng.
\newblock Real-time neural radiance talking portrait synthesis via audio-spatial decomposition.
\newblock {\em IJCV}, 2025.
278. Xianfang Zeng, Yusu Pan, Mengmeng Wang, Jiangning Zhang, and Yong Liu.
\newblock Realistic face reenactment via self-supervised disentangling of identity and pose.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2020.
279. Huayu Zhang, Yurui Ren, Yuanqi Chen, Ge~Li, and Thomas~H Li.
\newblock Exploiting multiple guidance from 3dmm for face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em AAAIW}, 2023.
280. Xiuzhe Wu, Pengfei Hu, Yang Wu, Xiaoyang Lyu, Yan-Pei Cao, Ying Shan, Wenming Yang, Zhongqian Sun, and Xiaojuan Qi.
\newblock Speech2lip: High-fidelity speech to lip generation by learning from a short video.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
281. Hui Fu, Zeqing Wang, Ke~Gong, Keze Wang, Tianshui Chen, Haojie Li, Haifeng Zeng, and Wenxiong Kang.
\newblock Mimic: Speaking style disentanglement for speech-driven 3d facial animation.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
282. Zhicheng Sheng, Liqiang Nie, Min Zhang, Xiaojun Chang, and Yan Yan.
\newblock Stochastic latent talking face generation towards emotional expressions and head poses.
\newblock {\em TCSVT}, 2023.
283. Yuan Gan, Zongxin Yang, Xihang Yue, Lingyun Sun, and Yi~Yang.
\newblock Efficient emotional adaptation for audio-driven talking-head generation.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
284. Shuai Tan, Bin Ji, and Ye~Pan.
\newblock Emmn: Emotional motion memory network for audio-driven emotional talking face generation.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
285. Shuyan Zhai, Meng Liu, Yongqiang Li, Zan Gao, Lei Zhu, and Liqiang Nie.
\newblock Talking face generation with audio-deduced emotional landmarks.
\newblock {\em TNNLS}, 2023.
286. Weizhi Zhong, Chaowei Fang, Yinqi Cai, Pengxu Wei, Gangming Zhao, Liang Lin, and Guanbin Li.
\newblock Identity-preserving talking face generation with landmark and appearance priors.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
287. Linrui Tian, Qi~Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo.
\newblock Emo: Emote portrait alive-generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2024.
288. Johanna Karras, Aleksander Holynski, Ting-Chun Wang, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
\newblock Dreampose: Fashion image-to-video synthesis via stable diffusion.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
289. Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk{\"u}hler, and George Drettakis.
\newblock 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 2023.
290. Shuchang Zhou, Taihong Xiao, Yi~Yang, Dieqiao Feng, Qinyao He, and Weiran He.
\newblock Genegan: Learning object transfiguration and attribute subspace from unpaired data.
\newblock In {\em BMVC}, 2017.
291. Youngjoo Jo and Jongyoul Park.
\newblock Sc-fegan: Face editing generative adversarial network with user's sketch and color.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2019.
292. Zhenliang He, Wangmeng Zuo, Meina Kan, Shiguang Shan, and Xilin Chen.
\newblock Attgan: Facial attribute editing by only changing what you want.
\newblock {\em TIP}, 2019.
293. Yujun Shen, Jinjin Gu, Xiaoou Tang, and Bolei Zhou.
\newblock Interpreting the latent space of gans for semantic face editing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
294. Xu~Yao, Alasdair Newson, Yann Gousseau, and Pierre Hellier.
\newblock A latent transformer for disentangled face editing in images and videos.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
295. Yue Gao, Fangyun Wei, Jianmin Bao, Shuyang Gu, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, and Zhouhui Lian.
\newblock High-fidelity and arbitrary face editing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
296. Konpat Preechakul, Nattanat Chatthee, Suttisak Wizadwongsa, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn.
\newblock Diffusion autoencoders: Toward a meaningful and decodable representation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
297. Jingxiang Sun, Xuan Wang, Yong Zhang, Xiaoyu Li, Qi~Zhang, Yebin Liu, and Jue Wang.
\newblock Fenerf: Face editing in neural radiance fields.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
298. Xianxu Hou, Xiaokang Zhang, Hanbang Liang, Linlin Shen, Zhihui Lai, and Jun Wan.
\newblock Guidedstyle: Attribute knowledge guided style manipulation for semantic face editing.
\newblock {\em Neural Networks}, 2022.
299. Yanbo Xu, Yueqin Yin, Liming Jiang, Qianyi Wu, Chengyao Zheng, Chen~Change Loy, Bo~Dai, and Wayne Wu.
\newblock Transeditor: Transformer-based dual-space gan for highly controllable facial editing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
300. Ziqi Huang, Kelvin~CK Chan, Yuming Jiang, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Collaborative diffusion for multi-modal face generation and editing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
301. Savas Ozkan, Mete Ozay, and Tom Robinson.
\newblock Conceptual and hierarchical latent space decomposition for face editing.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
302. Peng Zhou, Lingxi Xie, Bingbing Ni, and Qi~Tian.
\newblock Cips-3d++: End-to-end real-time high-resolution 3d-aware gans for gan inversion and stylization.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2023.
303. Shivangi Aneja, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Clipface: Text-guided editing of textured 3d morphable models.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, 2023.
304. Cuican Yu, Guansong Lu, Yihan Zeng, Jian Sun, Xiaodan Liang, Huibin Li, Zongben Xu, Songcen Xu, Wei Zhang, and Hang Xu.
\newblock Towards high-fidelity text-guided 3d face generation and manipulation using only images.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
305. Yusuf Dalva, Said~Fahri Alt{\i}ndi{\c{s}}, and Aysegul Dundar.
\newblock Vecgan: Image-to-image translation with interpretable latent directions.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
306. Zheng Ding, Xuaner Zhang, Zhihao Xia, Lars Jebe, Zhuowen Tu, and Xiuming Zhang.
\newblock Diffusionrig: Learning personalized priors for facial appearance editing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
307. Gyeongman Kim, Hajin Shim, Hyunsu Kim, Yunjey Choi, Junho Kim, and Eunho Yang.
\newblock Diffusion video autoencoders: Toward temporally consistent face video editing via disentangled video encoding.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
308. Weiqi~Luo Wenmin~Huang and Xiaochun~Cao Jiwu~Huang.
\newblock Sdgan: Disentangling semantic manipulation for facial attribute editing.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
309. Hao Zhang, Tianyuan DAI, Yanbo Xu, Yu-Wing Tai, and Chi-Keung Tang.
\newblock Facednerf: Semantics-driven face reconstruction, prompt editing and relighting with diffusion models.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, 2024.
310. Kaiwen Jiang, Shu-Yu Chen, Feng-Lin Liu, Hongbo Fu, and Lin Gao.
\newblock Towards high-quality and disentangled face editing in a 3d gan.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2025.
311. Yating Zeng, Xinpeng Zhang, and Guorui Feng.
\newblock Secure reversible privacy protection for face multiple attribute editing.
\newblock {\em PR}, 2025.
312. Bo~Chen, Shoukang Hu, Qi~Chen, Chenpeng Du, Ran Yi, Yanmin Qian, and Xie Chen.
\newblock Gstalker: Real-time audio-driven talking face generation via deformable gaussian splatting.
\newblock {\em arXiv}, 2024.
313. Jiahe Li, Jiawei Zhang, Xiao Bai, Jin Zheng, Xin Ning, Jun Zhou, and Lin Gu.
\newblock Talkinggaussian: Structure-persistent 3d talking head synthesis via gaussian splatting.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2024.
314. Wei Shen and Rujie Liu.
\newblock Learning residual images for face attribute manipulation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2017.
315. Xianxu Hou, Xiaokang Zhang, Yudong Li, and Linlin Shen.
\newblock Textface: Text-to-style mapping based face generation and manipulation.
\newblock {\em TMM}, 2022.
316. Zhengzhe Liu, Xiaojuan Qi, and Philip~HS Torr.
\newblock Global texture enhancement for fake face detection in the wild.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
317. Lingzhi Li, Jianmin Bao, Ting Zhang, Hao Yang, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, and Baining Guo.
\newblock Face x-ray for more general face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
318. Hanqing Zhao, Wenbo Zhou, Dongdong Chen, Tianyi Wei, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu.
\newblock Multi-attentional deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
319. Yuval Nirkin, Lior Wolf, Yosi Keller, and Tal Hassner.
\newblock Deepfake detection based on discrepancies between faces and their context.
\newblock {\em TPAMI}, 2021.
320. Kaede Shiohara and Toshihiko Yamasaki.
\newblock Detecting deepfakes with self-blended images.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
321. Tianyi Wang and Kam~Pui Chow.
\newblock Noise based deepfake detection via multi-head relative-interaction.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2023.
322. Zhongjie Ba, Qingyu Liu, Zhenguang Liu, Shuang Wu, Feng Lin, Li~Lu, and Kui Ren.
\newblock Exposing the deception: Uncovering more forgery clues for deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
323. Rohit Kundu, Hao Xiong, Vishal Mohanty, Athula Balachandran, and Amit~K Roy-Chowdhury.
\newblock Towards a universal synthetic video detector: From face or background manipulations to fully ai-generated content.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2025.
324. Yinglin Zheng, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Ming Zeng, and Fang Wen.
\newblock Exploring temporal coherence for more general video face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
325. Alexandros Haliassos, Konstantinos Vougioukas, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Lips don't lie: A generalisable and robust approach to face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
326. Zhihao Gu, Yang Chen, Taiping Yao, Shouhong Ding, Jilin Li, and Lizhuang Ma.
\newblock Delving into the local: Dynamic inconsistency learning for deepfake video detection.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2022.
327. Jongwook Choi, Taehoon Kim, Yonghyun Jeong, Seungryul Baek, and Jongwon Choi.
\newblock Exploiting style latent flows for generalizing deepfake detection video detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
328. Yuting Xu, Jian Liang, Lijun Sheng, and Xiao-Yu Zhang.
\newblock Towards generalizable deepfake video detection with thumbnail layout and graph reasoning.
\newblock {\em IJCV}, 2024.
329. Chunlei Peng, Zimin Miao, Decheng Liu, Nannan Wang, Ruimin Hu, and Xinbo Gao.
\newblock Where deepfakes gaze at? spatial-temporal gaze inconsistency analysis for video face forgery detection.
\newblock {\em TIFS}, 2024.
330. Changtao Miao, Zichang Tan, Qi~Chu, Nenghai Yu, and Guodong Guo.
\newblock Hierarchical frequency-assisted interactive networks for face manipulation detection.
\newblock {\em TIFS}, 2022.
331. Zhiqing Guo, Zhenhong Jia, Liejun Wang, Dewang Wang, Gaobo Yang, and Nikola Kasabov.
\newblock Constructing new backbone networks via space-frequency interactive convolution for deepfake detection.
\newblock {\em TIFS}, 2023.
332. Chuangchuang Tan, Yao Zhao, Shikui Wei, Guanghua Gu, Ping Liu, and Yunchao Wei.
\newblock Frequency-aware deepfake detection: Improving generalizability through frequency space domain learning.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2024.
333. Siran Peng, Tianshuo Zhang, Li~Gao, Xiangyu Zhu, Haoyuan Zhang, Kai Pang, and Zhen Lei.
\newblock Wmamba: Wavelet-based mamba for face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em MM}, 2025.
334. Anurag Dutta, Arnab~Kumar Das, Ruchira Naskar, and Rajat~Subhra Chakraborty.
\newblock Wavedif: Wavelet sub-band based deepfake identification in frequency domain.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2025.
335. Hao Dang, Feng Liu, Joel Stehouwer, Xiaoming Liu, and Anil~K Jain.
\newblock On the detection of digital face manipulation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
336. Tianchen Zhao, Xiang Xu, Mingze Xu, Hui Ding, Yuanjun Xiong, and Wei Xia.
\newblock Learning self-consistency for deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
337. Juan Hu, Xin Liao, Jinwen Liang, Wenbo Zhou, and Zheng Qin.
\newblock Finfer: Frame inference-based deepfake detection for high-visual-quality videos.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2022.
338. Xiao Guo, Xiaohong Liu, Zhiyuan Ren, Steven Grosz, Iacopo Masi, and Xiaoming Liu.
\newblock Hierarchical fine-grained image forgery detection and localization.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
339. Yuanhao Zhai, Tianyu Luan, David Doermann, and Junsong Yuan.
\newblock Towards generic image manipulation detection with weakly-supervised self-consistency learning.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
340. Jing Dong, Wei Wang, and Tieniu Tan.
\newblock Casia image tampering detection evaluation database.
\newblock In {\em ChinaSIP}, 2013.
341. Yu-Feng Hsu and Shih-Fu Chang.
\newblock Detecting image splicing using geometry invariants and camera characteristics consistency.
\newblock In {\em ICME}, 2006.
342. Bihan Wen, Ye~Zhu, Ramanathan Subramanian, Tian-Tsong Ng, Xuanjing Shen, and Stefan Winkler.
\newblock Coverage—a novel database for copy-move forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em ICIP}, 2016.
343. Scott McCloskey and Michael Albright.
\newblock Detecting gan-generated imagery using saturation cues.
\newblock In {\em ICIP}, 2019.
344. Junyi Cao, Chao Ma, Taiping Yao, Shen Chen, Shouhong Ding, and Xiaokang Yang.
\newblock End-to-end reconstruction-classification learning for face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
345. Lucy Chai, David Bau, Ser-Nam Lim, and Phillip Isola.
\newblock What makes fake images detectable? understanding properties that generalize.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2020.
346. Davide Cozzolino, Alessandro Pianese, Matthias Nie{\ss}ner, and Luisa Verdoliva.
\newblock Audio-visual person-of-interest deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2023.
347. Shruti Agarwal and Hany Farid.
\newblock Detecting deep-fake videos from aural and oral dynamics.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
348. Joel Frank, Thorsten Eisenhofer, Lea Sch{\"o}nherr, Asja Fischer, Dorothea Kolossa, and Thorsten Holz.
\newblock Leveraging frequency analysis for deep fake image recognition.
\newblock In {\em ICML}, 2020.
349. Iacopo Masi, Aditya Killekar, Royston~Marian Mascarenhas, Shenoy~Pratik Gurudatt, and Wael AbdAlmageed.
\newblock Two-branch recurrent network for isolating deepfakes in videos.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2020.
350. Ying Guo and Cheng Zhen.
\newblock Controllable guide-space for generalizable face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
351. Chih-Chung Hsu, Chia-Yen Lee, and Yi-Xiu Zhuang.
\newblock Learning to detect fake face images in the wild.
\newblock In {\em IS3C}, 2018.
352. Run Wang, Felix Juefei-Xu, Lei Ma, Xiaofei Xie, Yihao Huang, Jian Wang, and Yang Liu.
\newblock Fakespotter: a simple yet robust baseline for spotting ai-synthesized fake faces.
\newblock In {\em IJCAI}, 2021.
353. Xiao Hu, Peirong Ma, Zhuohao Mai, Shaohu Peng, Zhao Yang, and Li~Wang.
\newblock Face hallucination from low quality images using definition-scalable inference.
\newblock {\em PR}, 2019.
354. Tao Lu, Jiaming Wang, Junjun Jiang, and Yanduo Zhang.
\newblock Global-local fusion network for face super-resolution.
\newblock {\em Neurocomputing}, 2020.
355. Wenlong Zhang, Yihao Liu, Chao Dong, and Yu~Qiao.
\newblock Ranksrgan: Generative adversarial networks with ranker for image super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2019.
356. Yuecheng Pan, Jin Tang, and Tardi Tjahjadi.
\newblock Lpsrgan: Generative adversarial networks for super-resolution of license plate image.
\newblock {\em Neurocomputing}, 2024.
357. Biwen Lei, Kai Yu, Mengyang Feng, Miaomiao Cui, and Xuansong Xie.
\newblock Diffusiongan3d: Boosting text-guided 3d generation and domain adaption by combining 3d gans and diffusion priors.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2024.
358. Dong Guo and Terence Sim.
\newblock Digital face makeup by example.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2009.
359. Chen Li, Kun Zhou, and Stephen Lin.
\newblock Simulating makeup through physics-based manipulation of intrinsic image layers.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2015.
360. Hung-Jen Chen, Ka-Ming Hui, Szu-Yu Wang, Li-Wu Tsao, Hong-Han Shuai, and Wen-Huang Cheng.
\newblock Beautyglow: On-demand makeup transfer framework with reversible generative network.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2019.
361. Yu~Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong.
\newblock Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2019.
362. Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
\newblock Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2019.
363. Madhav Agarwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV~Jawahar.
\newblock Audio-visual face reenactment.
\newblock In {\em WACV}, 2023.
364. Peng Tang, Huihuang Zhao, Weiliang Meng, and Yaonan Wang.
\newblock One-shot motion talking head generation with audio-driven model.
\newblock {\em ESWA}, 2025.
365. Seunggyu Chang, Gihoon Kim, and Hayeon Kim.
\newblock Hairnerf: Geometry-aware image synthesis for hairstyle transfer.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2023.
366. Qiyao Deng, Jie Cao, Yunfan Liu, Qi~Li, and Zhenan Sun.
\newblock r-face: Reference guided face component editing.
\newblock {\em PR}, 2024.
