---
arxiv_id: '2403.20153'
title: 'Talk3D: High-Fidelity Talking Portrait Synthesis via Personalized 3D Generative
  Prior'
authors:
- Jaehoon Ko
- Kyusun Cho
- Joungbin Lee
- Heeji Yoon
- Sangmin Lee
- Sangjun Ahn
- Seungryong Kim
submitted: '2024-03-29'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.20153
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 7/76
citations_resolved_at: '2026-07-07T14:21:27+00:00'
references_parsed: 76
arxiv_version: ''
---

<div class="center">

<https://ku-cvlab.github.io/Talk3D>

</div>

In the following, we provide implementation details and offer further analysis of our experiment along with extensive qualitative results. Specifically, in Sec. <a href="#supsec:implementation_details" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supsec:implementation_details">1</a> we describe the implementation details including data preprocessing pipeline, feature extraction, and network architecture. In Sec. <a href="#supsec:result_and_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supsec:result_and_comparison">2</a>, we present additional experiments and comparisons that demonstrate the robustness and effectiveness of our method. In Sec. <a href="#supsec:further_analysis" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supsec:further_analysis">3</a>, we also provide further analyses to support the efficacy of our contributions, presenting qualitative results of ablation studies, and visualizations of attention map and triplane. In Sec. <a href="#supsec:editing" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supsec:editing">4</a>, we also introduce semantic manipulation over the generated portraits. Finally, in Sec. <a href="#supsec:video" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supsec:video">5</a> and Sec. <a href="#supsec:broader_impact" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supsec:broader_impact">6</a>, we briefly explain our supplementary video and further discuss the limitations and ethical considerations of our research.

# Additional Implementation Details

## Pre-processing

We follow the same image cropping as VIVE3D . They detect the 6 facial landmarks from every video frame, using an off-the-shelf detector  and perform Gaussian smoothing on the landmarks along the temporal axis to stabilize the transition of the cropping area. They additionally detect landmarks on a single reference image generated from the personalized generator. This reference image serves as an anchor for every frame to calculate the affine transformation matrices. Using these affine matrices, we calculate the cropping boundaries for each of the raw images. More specifically, they utilize a slightly wider cropping boundary compared to EG3D  which employs Deep3DFace  for image cropping.

## Augmenting feature extraction

For the audio feature extraction, we follow  which employ the pre-trained Wav2Vec  model and further encode with several layers of 1D convolutions. On the other hand, the augmenting features such as the eye (scalar factor), head rotation angles (3-dimensional vector), and landmarks (6-dimensional vector) are comparatively low-dimensional feature vectors. Therefore, we upsample these augmenting features using the positional encodings and further encode with several layers of MLP. Each of the output features is a 64-dimensional feature token and is fed to our cross-attention network $`\mathcal{F}_\mathrm{CA}`$.

## Network architecture

### Attention network.

Our deltaplane predictor $`\mathcal{F}`$ first encodes the 256-resolution triplane $`\mathbf{P}`$ into 32-resolution feature map $`\mathbf{E}`$, while its hidden dimension is upscaled from 32 to 256.

With given flattened image feature vector $`\mathbf{e}`$ and conditioning tokens $`\mathbf{t}_n`$, our cross-attention layer predicts the low-resolution feature map $`\mathbf{E}^\mathrm{out}_n`$ as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathbf{E}^\mathrm{out}_n = \mathcal{F}_{\mathrm{CA}}(\mathbf{e}, \mathbf{t}_n).
\end{equation}
```

Given learnable parameters of cross-attention layer $`\mathbf{w}_\mathrm{q}`$, $`\mathbf{w}_\mathrm{k}`$, $`\mathbf{w}_\mathrm{v}`$, the above process can be divided into the sub-processes as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    Q = \mathbf{e} \mathbf{w}_\mathrm{q}, ~~K_{n} = \mathbf{t}_{n} \mathbf{w}_\mathrm{k}, ~~V_{n} = \mathbf{t}_{n} \mathbf{w}_\mathrm{v},
\end{equation}
```
``` math
\begin{equation}
    A_{n} = \mathrm{softmax}(Q K^{\intercal}_{n}), ~~ \mathbf{E}^\mathrm{out}_{n} = \mathrm{A}_{n} V_{n},
\end{equation}
```
where $`Q`$, $`K_{n}`$, $`V_{n}`$ denote query, key and value representation, and $`A_{n}`$ represents attention scores. Each of the parameters represents MLP with 1 layer and 64 hidden dimensions.

### Super-resolution module.

We replaced the original super-resolution module in EG3D  with GFPGAN , which enhances rendering quality by reducing noise or artifacts in the background. Following the training strategy documented in the main paper, we fine-tune the pre-trained GFPGAN for a few epochs. For a fair comparison, all quantitative evaluations were measured on the results obtained by using the original EG3D’s super-resolution module.

# Additional Results and Comparisons

## Novel-view synthesis and depth information

We demonstrate the robustness of Talk3D by generating images from the extreme viewpoints, shown in Fig. <a href="#supfig:ood_pose_depth" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:ood_pose_depth">[supfig:ood_pose_depth]</a>. We compare our method with the previous NeRF-based methods  visualizing both the generated images and their corresponding depth maps. Note that, the other NeRF-based methods do not synthesize the background and therefore lack depth information in that particular area. Furthermore, they frequently show the head and torso separation due to their separative volumetric representation for torso rendering. Especially, RAD-NeRF  and ER-NeRF  employ a 2D deformation neural field for torso rendering, thus they are not capable of generating a realistic torso geometry. In contrast, our model successfully constructs the entire image as a single NeRF representation, providing depth information for all parts of the synthesized portrait.

## Additional dataset and qualitative results

To further demonstrate the generalizability of our method, besides the dataset  in the main paper, we also conduct experiments on datasets from HDTF , which are the YouTube video clips containing in-the-wild talking portraits of 720p or 1080p resolution. We utilize the same facial cropping method of VIVE3D  and split each video for both training and validation. We show additional generated results on HDTF dataset under the *self-driven* setting and the *cross-driven* setting in Fig. <a href="#supfig:self_driven" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:self_driven">[supfig:self_driven]</a> and Fig. <a href="#supfig:cross_driven" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:cross_driven">[supfig:cross_driven]</a>, respectively.

## Comparison with HFA-GP 

HFA-GP  is a similar work that utilizes a personalized 3D-aware generative prior for talking head synthesis. Considering the high relevance of HFA-GP, it is crucial to compare HFA-GP and our model thoroughly. However, the implementation code of HFA-GP was incomplete, lacking essential components crucial for reproducing the experimental setup outlined in the original paper. We attempted to fix errors in the code, yet the outcomes differed significantly from those reported in the original paper. These discrepancies are not entirely fair to them, thus the results in Tab. <a href="#suptab:hfagp_quan" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="suptab:hfagp_quan">[suptab:hfagp_quan]</a> and Fig. <a href="#supfig:hfagp_qual" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:hfagp_qual">[supfig:hfagp_qual]</a> are limited to provide an accurate comparison for the model performance.

## Comparison with GeneFace 

GeneFace  is another NeRF-based talking portrait synthesis method, but instead of directly conditioning the NeRF model on audio features, it employs audio-to-motion mapping trained on a corpus of diverse talking heads. We compare our method with GeneFace on Tab. <a href="#suptab:geneface" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="suptab:geneface">[suptab:geneface]</a> and Fig. <a href="#supfig:geneface" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:geneface">[supfig:geneface]</a>. Note that the GeneFace is designed for different settings, the comparisons are not entirely fair and are just for reference.

# Further Analysis

## Analysis of attention

In Fig. <a href="#fig:ablation_token" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ablation_token">[fig:ablation_token]</a>, we visualize the attention map to demonstrate the efficacy of our attention-based network. The first column is the generated image result, while the rest of the columns show the attention map of the low-resolution xy-plane (the plane that is orthogonal to canonical direction) captured by each of the specific conditioning tokens. The result shows that each of the conditioning tokens successfully disentangles the local movements of the low-resolution feature map. Despite the close relationship between angles and landmarks, they capture different attention maps, since the head rotation angles are closely related to torso movement, while facial landmarks are suitable for capturing the background motion.

## Analysis of triplane

Fig. <a href="#fig:plane_vis" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:plane_vis">[fig:plane_vis]</a> visualizes the generated image alongside its two corresponding triplanes: the identity plane and the deltaplane. Each column shows the three orthogonal planes. Especially xy-plane (orthogonal to canonical direction) in the 1st and 4th columns highlights the facial structure representation within the identity plane. Also, the deltaplane visualization confirms our method’s ability to precisely manipulate specific regions such as the lips, eyes, torso, and background.

## Ablation studies

### Importance of each token selection. 

Fig. <a href="#supfig:ablation_features" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:ablation_features">[supfig:ablation_features]</a> provides a qualitative comparison from the ablation study of feature token selection (discussed in the main paper). The figure demonstrates how each feature token influences its corresponding region. We highlight the specific regions with red boxes, that illustrate each of the image quality degradation. Eye features are crucial for accurate eye movement prediction, while angle and landmark tokens are essential in controlling torso and background movement, respectively. See the difference in the eye-blink, background movement, or neck-tie region. The results obtained without employing null vectors show artifacts, particularly in the mouth region.

### Deltaplane predictor. 

Fig. <a href="#supfig:ablation_deltaplane" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:ablation_deltaplane">[supfig:ablation_deltaplane]</a> showcases a qualitative evaluation of our deltaplane predictor’s design choices discussed in the main paper. This evaluation highlights the critical role of each design element in optimizing both image quality and lip-synchronization accuracy. Our results establish the necessity of all design aspects in achieving these performance gains.

### Effect of the personalized generator. 

To demonstrate the effectiveness of incorporating the personalized generator, we compare our full model with an ablation setting that does not utilize the generator fine-tuning method of VIVE3D . The quantitative comparison in Tab. <a href="#tab:personalize_abl" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:personalize_abl">[tab:personalize_abl]</a> illustrates the image quality enhancement achieved through our personalization method, as reflected in the higher metrics of our full model. In Fig. <a href="#abl:personalize" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="abl:personalize">[abl:personalize]</a>, we observed image quality degradation from the ablation result, especially for the noisy pixels around the nose or eye region.

# Facial Editing

In this section, we introduce an additional feature of our model that distinguishes it from other NeRF-based methods: facial attribute manipulation. Talk3D is built on pre-trained EG3D  and thus inherits the rich and diverse latent space of the generative models. The latent space of EG3D enables semantic editing by adding pre-defined style vectors to the input latent code. We exploit InterFaceGAN  to find several style vectors $`\mathbf{w}_\mathrm{edit}`$ which represent the semantic editing directions within the EG3D latent space. However, naively applying InterFaceGAN to our methodology is not feasible, since our approach directly predicts the triplane representation instead of a latent code. So we slightly alter the methodology of InterFaceGAN by simply replacing the identity triplane with the edited triplane $`\mathbf{P}_\mathrm{edit}`$. Specifically, for given personalized generator $`\mathcal{G}_\mathrm{ID}`$ and identity latent code $`\mathbf{w}_\mathrm{ID}`$, we first construct the edited triplane $`\mathbf{P}_\mathrm{edit}`$ as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathbf{P}_\mathrm{edit} = \mathcal{G}_\mathrm{ID}(\mathbf{w}_\mathrm{ID}+\mathbf{w}_\mathrm{edit};\theta^*_\mathcal{G}).
\end{equation}
```
Then we replace the identity triplane to generate edited image $`I^\mathrm{edit}_n`$ as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    I^\mathrm{edit}_n = \mathcal{R}(\mathbf{P}_\mathrm{edit} + \Delta \mathbf{P}_n, \pi_n;\theta^*_\mathcal{R}).
\end{equation}
```

In Fig. <a href="#supfig:facial_edit" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="supfig:facial_edit">[supfig:facial_edit]</a>, we visualize the results of editing several attributes, including age and hair length. The process demonstrates consistent manipulation across attributes like age and hair length, without disrupting lip synchronization.

# Supplementary Video

To comprehensively visualize the efficacy of our proposed method in the domain of talking facial video synthesis, we have compiled a supplementary video that encapsulates each result shown in the main paper and the supplementary materials. This video showcases not only the facial animations generated by our method but also includes detailed comparisons with other relevant techniques. The video also features diverse outcomes, highlighting our approach’s versatility across different languages and robustness of rendering performance at extreme viewpoints. Additionally, the video incorporates an ablation study that dissects the contributions of individual components within our methodology.

# Broader Impact

## Ethical considerations

In developing Talk3D, we hope to advance applications in digital humans, video production, and human-computer interaction assistance by generating highly realistic talking portraits with accurate lip-audio synchronization. However, we recognize the ethical considerations surrounding the misuse of such technology for malicious purposes. The photorealistic nature of the generated portrait videos makes it challenging for individuals to distinguish between authentic and synthetic content. To address this concern, we emphasize the importance of informing users about the authenticity of videos and recognize the ongoing challenges in discriminating synthesized high-fidelity portraits from recent NeRF-based methods. To contribute to the responsible development and deployment of talking portrait synthesis, we commit to sharing our generated results with deepfake detection communities and supporting the enhancement of detection mechanisms. Additionally, we advocate for protective measures, such as incorporating digital watermarks in real portrait speech videos, to mitigate potential misuse. Furthermore, we highlight the need to consider regulatory frameworks that govern the use of deepfake techniques to prevent unintended negative consequences when synthetic content is shared on social media platforms. Both policymakers and the public must be informed about the potential risks associated with deepfakes, fostering a cautious and responsible approach to their creation and utilization.

## Limitations and future work

Compared to earlier NeRF-based works, our Talk3D excels in high-fidelity talking portrait synthesis, especially when rendered from the extreme viewpoint, thanks to the rich generative prior of EG3D . However, we also inherit its shortcomings, as our method does not generalize well outside of photorealistic images of human faces, compared to other talking face synthesis works such as MakeItTalk  and SadTalker , which can handle cartoon characters or stylized caricatures. Also, our model’s current reliance on GAN inversion introduces technical complexities that impact data preparation. Specifically, it demands precise alignment and cropping of video frames, extending preprocessing time. Additionally, incomplete coverage of essential facial regions can lead to visual artifacts in the form of blurriness or distortion. Future development will focus on overcoming these limitations to increase our method’s adaptability and ensure consistent performance across a wider range of training data.

## References

1. An, S., Xu, H., Shi, Y., Song, G., Ogras, U.Y., Luo, L.: Panohead: Geometry-aware 3d full-head synthesis in 360deg. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 20950--20959 (June 2023)
2. Baevski, A., Zhou, Y., Mohamed, A., Auli, M.: wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations. NeurIPS  \textbf{33},  12449--12460 (2020)
3. Bai, Y., Fan, Y., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Sun, J., Yuan, C., Shan, Y.: High-fidelity facial avatar reconstruction from monocular video with generative priors. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp. 4541--4551 (June 2023)
4. Baltru{\v{s}}aitis, T., Mahmoud, M., Robinson, P.: Cross-dataset learning and person-specific normalisation for automatic action unit detection. In: 2015 11th IEEE International Conference and Workshops on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG). vol.~6, pp.~1--6. IEEE (2015)
5. Baltrusaitis, T., Zadeh, A., Lim, Y.C., Morency, L.P.: Openface 2.0: Facial behavior analysis toolkit. In: 2018 13th IEEE international conference on automatic face \& gesture recognition (FG 2018). pp. 59--66. IEEE (2018)
6. Bhattarai, A.R., Nie{\ss}ner, M., Sevastopolsky, A.: Triplanenet: An encoder for eg3d inversion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision. pp. 3055--3065 (2024)
7. Bulat, A., Tzimiropoulos, G.: How far are we from solving the 2d \& 3d face alignment problem?(and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks). In: Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision (2017)
8. Chan, E.R., Lin, C.Z., Chan, M.A., Nagano, K., Pan, B., De~Mello, S., Gallo, O., Guibas, L.J., Tremblay, J., Khamis, S., et~al.: Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 16123--16133 (2022)
9. Chan, E.R., Monteiro, M., Kellnhofer, P., Wu, J., Wetzstein, G.: {pi-GAN}: Periodic implicit generative adversarial networks for {3D}-aware image synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2021)
10. Chen, A., Xu, Z., Geiger, A., Yu, J., Su, H.: Tensorf: Tensorial radiance fields. In: Computer Vision--ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23--27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXII. pp. 333--350. Springer (2022)
11. Chen, L., Li, Z., Maddox, R.K., Duan, Z., Xu, C.: Lip movements generation at a glance. In: Computer Vision--ECCV 2018: 15th European Conference, Munich, Germany, September 8--14, 2018, Proceedings, Part VII 15. pp. 538--553. Springer (2018)
12. Chen, L., Maddox, R.K., Duan, Z., Xu, C.: Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic pixel-wise loss. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 7832--7841 (2019)
13. Chen, X., Deng, Y., Wang, B.: Mimic3d: Thriving 3d-aware gans via 3d-to-2d imitation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2023)
14. Christos~Doukas, M., Zafeiriou, S., Sharmanska, V.: Headgan: Video-and-audio-driven talking head synthesis. arXiv  (2020)
15. Chung, J.S., Zisserman, A.: Lip reading in the wild. In: Computer Vision--ACCV 2016: 13th Asian Conference on Computer Vision, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers, Part II 13. pp. 87--103. Springer (2017)
16. Chung, J.S., Zisserman, A.: Out of time: Automated lip sync in the wild. In: Computer Vision--ACCV 2016 Workshops: ACCV 2016 International Workshops, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers, Part II 13. pp. 251--263. Springer (2017)
17. Das, D., Biswas, S., Sinha, S., Bhowmick, B.: Speech-driven facial animation using cascaded gans for learning of motion and texture. In: ECCV (2020)
18. Deng, Y., Yang, J., Xiang, J., Tong, X.: {GRAM}: Generative radiance manifolds for {3D}-aware image generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2022)
19. Deng, Y., Yang, J., Xu, S., Chen, D., Jia, Y., Tong, X.: Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition workshops (2019)
20. DeVries, T., Bautista, M.A., Srivastava, N., Taylor, G.W., Susskind, J.M.: Unconstrained scene generation with locally conditioned radiance fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 14304--14313 (2021)
21. Ekman, P., Friesen, W.V.: Facial Action Coding System: Manual. Palo Alto: Consulting Psychologists Press (1978)
22. Fr{\"u}hst{\"u}ck, A., Sarafianos, N., Xu, Y., Wonka, P., Tung, T.: Vive3d: Viewpoint-independent video editing using 3d-aware gans. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4446--4455 (2023)
23. Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair, S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y.: Generative adversarial nets. Advances in neural information processing systems  \textbf{27} (2014)
24. Gu, J., Liu, L., Wang, P., Theobalt, C.: {StyleNeRF}: A style-based {3D} aware generator for high-resolution image synthesis. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (2022)
25. Guo, Y., Chen, K., Liang, S., Liu, Y.J., Bao, H., Zhang, J.: Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 5784--5794 (2021)
26. Heusel, M., Ramsauer, H., Unterthiner, T., Nessler, B., Hochreiter, S.: Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium. Advances in neural information processing systems  \textbf{30} (2017)
27. Huang, Y., Wang, Y., Tai, Y., Liu, X., Shen, P., Li, S., Li, J., Huang, F.: Curricularface: Adaptive curriculum learning loss for deep face recognition. In: CVPR (2020)
28. Jamaludin, A., Chung, J.S., Zisserman, A.: You said that?: Synthesising talking faces from audio. International Journal of Computer Vision  \textbf{127},  1767--1779 (2019)
29. Jiang, B., Guo, Z., Yang, Y.: Meta-auxiliary network for 3d gan inversion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10884  (2023) [arXiv:2305.10884](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10884)
30. Karras, T., Laine, S., Aila, T.: A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4401--4410 (2019)
31. Ko, J., Cho, K., Choi, D., Ryoo, K., Kim, S.: 3d gan inversion with pose optimization. WACV  (2023)
32. Li, J., Zhang, J., Bai, X., Zhou, J., Gu, L.: Efficient region-aware neural radiance fields for high-fidelity talking portrait synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09323  (2023) [arXiv:2307.09323](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.09323)
33. Lin, C., Lindell, D., Chan, E., Wetzstein, G.: 3d gan inversion for controllable portrait image animation. In: ECCV Workshop on Learning to Generate 3D Shapes and Scenes (2022)
34. Liu, X., Xu, Y., Wu, Q., Zhou, H., Wu, W., Zhou, B.: Semantic-aware implicit neural audio-driven video portrait generation. In: Computer Vision--ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23--27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXVII. pp. 106--125. Springer (2022)
35. Lu, Y., Chai, J., Cao, X.: Live speech portraits: Real-time photorealistic talking-head animation. ACM Trans. Graph.  \textbf{40}(6) (dec 2021)
36. Ma, Z., Zhu, X., Qi, G.J., Lei, Z., Zhang, L.: Otavatar: One-shot talking face avatar with controllable tri-plane rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 16901--16910 (2023)
37. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In: ECCV (2020)
38. M{\"u}ller, T., Evans, A., Schied, C., Keller, A.: Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)  \textbf{41}(4),  1--15 (2022)
39. Niemeyer, M., Geiger, A.: Giraffe: Representing scenes as compositional generative neural feature fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 11453--11464 (2021)
40. Or-El, R., Luo, X., Shan, M., Shechtman, E., Park, J.J., Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, I.: {StyleSDF}: High-resolution {3D}-consistent image and geometry generation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (2022)
41. Prajwal, K., Mukhopadhyay, R., Namboodiri, V.P., Jawahar, C.: A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild. In: Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia. pp. 484--492 (2020)
42. Roich, D., Mokady, R., Bermano, A.H., Cohen-Or, D.: Pivotal tuning for latent-based editing of real images. ACM Trans. Graph.  (2021)
43. Schwarz, K., Liao, Y., Niemeyer, M., Geiger, A.: {GRAF}: Generative radiance fields for {3D}-aware image synthesis. In: Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2020)
44. Schwarz, K., Sauer, A., Niemeyer, M., Liao, Y., Geiger, A.: {VoxGRAF}: Fast {3D}-aware image synthesis with sparse voxel grids. In: Proceedings of the Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2022)
45. Shen, S., Li, W., Zhu, Z., Duan, Y., Zhou, J., Lu, J.: Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot talking head synthesis. In: Computer Vision--ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23--27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XII. pp. 666--682. Springer (2022)
46. Shen, S., Li, W., Zhu, Z., Duan, Y., Zhou, J., Lu, J.: Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot talking head synthesis. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 666--682. Springer (2022)
47. Shen, Y., Gu, J., Tang, X., Zhou, B.: Interpreting the latent space of gans for semantic face editing. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition (2020)
48. Shen, Y., Yang, C., Tang, X., Zhou, B.: Interfacegan: Interpreting the disentangled face representation learned by gans. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence  (2020)
49. Song, L., Wu, W., Qian, C., He, R., Loy, C.C.: Everybody’s talkin’: Let me talk as you want. IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security  \textbf{17},  585--598 (2022)
50. Sun, J., Wang, X., Wang, L., Li, X., Zhang, Y., Zhang, H., Liu, Y.: Next3d: Generative neural texture rasterization for 3d-aware head avatars. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 20991--21002 (2023)
51. Suwajanakorn, S., Seitz, S.M., Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, I.: Synthesizing obama: learning lip sync from audio. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)  \textbf{36}(4),  1--13 (2017)
52. Tang, J., Wang, K., Zhou, H., Chen, X., He, D., Hu, T., Liu, J., Zeng, G., Wang, J.: Real-time neural radiance talking portrait synthesis via audio-spatial decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12368  (2022) [arXiv:2211.12368](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12368)
53. Thies, J., Elgharib, M., Tewari, A., Theobalt, C., Nie{\ss}ner, M.: Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment. In: Computer Vision--ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23--28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVI 16. pp. 716--731. Springer (2020)
54. Trevithick, A., Chan, M., Stengel, M., Chan, E., Liu, C., Yu, Z., Khamis, S., Chandraker, M., Ramamoorthi, R., Nagano, K.: Real-time radiance fields for single-image portrait view synthesis. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)  \textbf{42}(4),  1--15 (2023)
55. Wang, K., Wu, Q., Song, L., Yang, Z., Wu, W., Qian, C., He, R., Qiao, Y., Loy, C.C.: Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face generation. In: Computer Vision--ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23--28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXI. pp. 700--717. Springer (2020)
56. Wang, T., Zhang, B., Zhang, T., Gu, S., Bao, J., Baltrusaitis, T., Shen, J., Chen, D., Wen, F., Chen, Q., et~al.: Rodin: A generative model for sculpting 3d digital avatars using diffusion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 4563--4573 (2023)
57. Wang, X., Li, Y., Zhang, H., Shan, Y.: Towards real-world blind face restoration with generative facial prior. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 9168--9178 (2021)
58. Wiles, O., Koepke, A.S., Zisserman, A.: X2face: A network for controlling face generation using images, audio, and pose codes. In: Computer Vision--ECCV 2018: 15th European Conference, Munich, Germany, September 8-14, 2018, Proceedings, Part XIII 15. pp. 690--706. Springer (2018)
59. Xiang, J., Yang, J., Deng, Y., Tong, X.: {GRAM-HD: 3D}-consistent image generation at high resolution with generative radiance manifolds. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (2023)
60. Xie, J., Ouyang, H., Piao, J., Lei, C., Chen, Q.: High-fidelity 3d gan inversion by pseudo-multi-view optimization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 321--331 (2023)
61. Xu, H., Song, G., Jiang, Z., Zhang, J., Shi, Y., Liu, J., Ma, W., Feng, J., Luo, L.: Omniavatar: Geometry-guided controllable 3d head synthesis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 12814--12824 (2023)
62. Xu, Y., Shu, Z., Smith, C., Huang, J.B., Oh, S.W.: In-n-out: Face video inversion and editing with volumetric decomposition. arXiv preprint arXiv: 2302.04871  (2023) [arXiv:2302.04871](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04871)
63. Xue, Y., Li, Y., Singh, K.K., Lee, Y.J.: Giraffe {HD}: A high-resolution {3D}-aware generative model. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 18440--18449 (2022)
64. Yao, S., Zhong, R., Yan, Y., Zhai, G., Yang, X.: Dfa-nerf: Personalized talking head generation via disentangled face attributes neural rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00791  (2022) [arXiv:2201.00791](../2022/2201.00791.md)
65. Ye, Z., He, J., Jiang, Z., Huang, R., Huang, J., Liu, J., Ren, Y., Yin, X., Ma, Z., Zhao, Z.: Geneface++: Generalized and stable real-time audio-driven 3d talking face generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00787  (2023) [arXiv:2305.00787](../2023/2305.00787.md)
66. Ye, Z., Jiang, Z., Ren, Y., Liu, J., He, J., Zhao, Z.: Geneface: Generalized and high-fidelity audio-driven 3d talking face synthesis. In: The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations (2022)
67. Yin, F., Zhang, Y., Wang, X., Wang, T., Li, X., Gong, Y., Fan, Y., Cun, X., Shan, Y., Oztireli, C., et~al.: 3d gan inversion with facial symmetry prior. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 342--351 (2023)
68. Yu, A., Fridovich-Keil, S., Tancik, M., Chen, Q., Recht, B., Kanazawa, A.: Plenoxels: Radiance fields without neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.05131  (2021) [arXiv:2112.05131](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.05131)
69. Yu, C., Gao, C., Wang, J., Yu, G., Shen, C., Sang, N.: Bisenet v2: Bilateral network with guided aggregation for real-time semantic segmentation. International Journal of Computer Vision  \textbf{129},  3051--3068 (2021)
70. Yu, C., Wang, J., Peng, C., Gao, C., Yu, G., Sang, N.: Bisenet: Bilateral segmentation network for real-time semantic segmentation. In: Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV). pp. 325--341 (2018)
71. Yuan, Z., Zhu, Y., Li, Y., Liu, H., Yuan, C.: Make encoder great again in 3d gan inversion through geometry and occlusion-aware encoding. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). pp. 2437--2447 (October 2023)
72. Zhang, R., Isola, P., Efros, A.A., Shechtman, E., Wang, O.: The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 586--595 (2018)
73. Zhang, W., Cun, X., Wang, X., Zhang, Y., Shen, X., Guo, Y., Shan, Y., Wang, F.: Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 8652--8661 (2023)
74. Zhang, Z., Li, L., Ding, Y., Fan, C.: Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2021)
75. Zhou, H., Sun, Y., Wu, W., Loy, C.C., Wang, X., Liu, Z.: Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 4176--4186 (2021)
76. Zhou, Y., Han, X., Shechtman, E., Echevarria, J., Kalogerakis, E., Li, D.: Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation. ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG)  \textbf{39}(6),  1--15 (2020)
