---
arxiv_id: "2408.09357"
title:
  "Meta-Learning Empowered Meta-Face: Personalized Speaking Style Adaptation
  for Audio-Driven 3D Talking Face Animation"
authors:
  - Xukun Zhou
  - Fengxin Li
  - Ziqiao Peng
  - Kejian Wu
  - Jun He
  - Biao Qin
  - Zhaoxin Fan
  - Hongyan Liu
submitted: "2024-08-18"
categories:
  - cs.GR
  - cs.AI
  - cs.SD
  - eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.09357
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 4/37
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T14:19:59+00:00"
references_parsed: 37
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Abstract

Audio-driven 3D face animation is increasingly vital in live streaming and augmented reality applications. While remarkable progress has been observed, most existing approaches are designed for specific individuals with predefined speaking styles, thus neglecting the adaptability to varied speaking styles. To address this limitation, this paper introduces MetaFace, a novel methodology meticulously crafted for speaking style adaptation. Grounded in the novel concept of meta-learning, MetaFace is composed of several key components: the Robust Meta Initialization Stage (RMIS) for fundamental speaking style adaptation, the Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process (DRMN) for forging connections between observed and unobserved speaking styles, and the Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach to enhance the efficiency of model optimization as well as learning style details. Leveraging these novel designs, MetaFace not only significantly outperforms robust existing baselines but also establishes a new state-of-the-art, as substantiated by our experimental results.

# Introduction

Audio-driven 3D talking face animation has become increasingly prevalent in various sectors, including gaming , live streaming , and animation production . Leveraging advanced technologies such as 3D parametric models , Neural Radiance Fields , and Gaussian splatting , these methods have achieved significant success in achieving accurate lip synchronization and facial emotions. Nonetheless, the intricate relationship between facial expressions and accompanying audio still needs to be explored. In other words, the problem of speaking style adaptation still needs to be addressed.

Several methods have been proposed to address this issue in recent years . For instance, SelfTalk introduces a self-training pipeline that leverages text and 3D lip meshes for speaking style ad aptation. Meanwhile, FaceFormer focuses on training different individuals with predefined speaking styles. Although these approaches mark some progress, they still face significant challenges: **1) Firstly**, most methods require a substantial amount of data for effective speaking style distillation. **2) Secondly**, the prevalent use of cross-training technologies for speaking style adaptation necessitates paired sentences, reducing flexibility in application. Therefore, a pertinent question emerges: **_Is it possible to devise a flexible and straightforward method for speaking style adaptation in audio-driven 3D face animation that utilizes minimal data?_**

To answer this question, we introduce MetaFace, a novel framework designed explicitly for Personalized Speaking Style Adaptation in Audio-Driven 3D Talking Face Animation. The core idea of MetaFace, illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig.meta" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig.meta">[fig.meta]</a>, is grounded in the principle that Audio-Driven 3D talking face animation can significantly benefit from the foundational concepts of meta-learning. Specifically, to facilitate rapid adaptation with minimal data, MetaFace consists of a Robust Meta Initialization Stage (RMIS) and a Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach for speaking style adaptation. In MetaFace, the RMIS is utilized to initialize the network weights from a pre-trained 3D talking face animation model, infusing the network with basic style cues of the target individual. Subsequently, the latter employs the renowned LoRA fine-tuning strategy to equip the model with personalized details quickly. Furthermore, acknowledging the challenges that few-shot training often faces in handling training and test data from different domains separately, MetaFace introduces a Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process (DRMP) to enable the model to establish additional connections between training and testing samples, thereby further enhancing the performance of speaking style adaptation.

Extensive experiments are conducted using the widely recognized VOCASet and BIWI datasets. The experimental outcomes demonstrate that MetaFace outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods, showcasing its superior performance in the field.

Our contributions can be summarized as follows:

- We introduce MetaFace, a novel framework designed explicitly for Personalized Speaking Style Adaptation in Audio-Driven 3D Talking Face Animation, leveraging the foundational principles of meta-learning.

- We develop key components within MetaFace, including the Robust Meta Initialization Stage, the Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process, and the Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach, collectively enhancing the framework’s performance to achieve state-of-the-art results.

- We rigorously evaluate our method against existing techniques, demonstrating its superior effectiveness through extensive experiments conducted on several widely recognized datasets.

# Related Work

This paper primarily focuses on audio-driven 3D talking face animation, explicitly emphasizing the problem of personalized speaking style adaptation. To this end, this section first reviews related works concerning Lip Synchronization in 3D Face Animation. Subsequently, it discusses contributions in Style Speaking Adaptation in 3D Face Animation. Finally, we explore the role of Meta-learning and Parameter Adaptation, which serve as foundational technologies in the MetaFace framework.

## Lip Synchronization in 3D Face Animation

For most 3D face animation techniques, the primary objective remains the achievement of precise lip synchronization. Early methods primarily rely on audio produced by Text-to-Speech technologies and real-life facial motion videos animated using visemes to extract features synchronized with audio. Although these methods are relatively straightforward, they depend heavily on meticulously organized datasets, posing significant challenges in creating animations tailored to individual users. To overcome these limitations, deep learning-based approaches have been introduced. pioneers using neural networks to generate mesh movements directly from audio features. Subsequently, introduces a method that separates audio-correlated and uncorrelated information, yielding more realistic animation performance. Rather than investigating audio features, focuses on the prediction mode, enhancing the efficiency of transformer models in facial motion prediction by employing an auto-regressive model. Building on this foundation, further develops a code query-based approach to speech-driven 3D facial animation, improving realism by minimizing mapping uncertainties and outperforming existing methodologies. Recently, inspired by lip reading techniques, further enhances the accuracy of lip movements by integrating audio, textual content, and lip shapes, achieving state-of-the-art results.

Although the methods mentioned above have achieved remarkable progress, they primarily focus on improving lip synchronization, while the equally important question of personalized speaking style adaptation has been largely overlooked. In our work, we introduce MetaFace to address this issue in both an effective and efficient manner.

## Speaking Style Adaptation in 3D Face Animation

Recent advancements in 3D Face Animation have increasingly focused on adapting speaking styles. Studies primarily explore two approaches: utilizing external personality labels , and decoupling facial features from audio . The first approach employs personality labels to foster the learning of personalized embeddings, exemplified by , who created a personalized dataset and a model to integrate individual styles. This foundation has spurred methods that incorporate emotional aspects or specific speaking styles . The second approach focuses on disentangling speaking style from audio features, with innovations like cross-sample training to separate emotional and content features . and further enhance this by utilizing identity and facial motions as additional training conditions, improving model performance even with minimal data .

Although these approaches mark significant progress, they still face substantial challenges. Firstly, most methods necessitate a considerable amount of data for effective speaking style distillation. Additionally, the prevalent use of cross-training technologies for speaking style adaptation requires paired sentences, reducing application flexibility. MetaFace addresses these issues by leveraging meta-learning and low-rank fine-tuning principles.

## Meta-learning and Parameter Adaptation

Meta-learning is a branch of machine learning methods that enables deep models to adapt to novel categories with minimal training data . The concept of meta-learning was first introduced by , which explored adapting the learning rate for novel category adaptation. Subsequently, MAML proposed a model-agnostic meta-learning approach for fast adaptation by utilizing the concept of learning to learn. Following this, numerous works have been proposed to enhance this line of research from diverse perspectives . In parallel, advancements in model pretraining have significantly influenced meta-learning. Initially introduced by , pretraining models on large datasets and fine-tuning them on smaller tasks has been influential across various domains . However, with the advent of large language models like GPT-3 and GPT-4 , fine-tuning entire models for small tasks has become computationally prohibitive. To address this limitation, proposes a solution by decomposing model parameters into two low-rank matrices, significantly reducing computational costs while maintaining performance. This approach, known as LoRA, has been widely adopted across various applications .

Although numerous meta-learning methods and parameter adaptation techniques have been proposed and widely applied across various domains, their potential in efficient 3D face animation still needs to be explored. In this paper, we adopt the concept of meta-learning and low-rank fine-tuning for speaking style adaptation in 3D talking face animation.

# Method

## Overview

This work explores the critical issue of personalized speaking style adaptation. Contrary to existing supervised learning frameworks such as those proposed by , , and , which delineate the mapping relationship between audio and facial animation for all speakers within a dataset, our study advocates for a "meta-face" methodology, tailored explicitly for superior adaptation to novel individuals.

Specifically, we first examine an audio-driven 3D facial animation dataset assembled from a diverse group of individuals, denoted as $`\mathcal{P}=\{1,2,\cdots,p,\cdots,|\mathcal{P}|\}`$, where $`p`$ identifies the $`p`$-th participant. For each individual $`p`$, the dataset encapsulates observed audio-face pairings, represented as $`\mathcal{D}_p=\{(\mathbf{a}_{p, m}, \mathbf{v}_{p, m}), m \in \{1,2,\cdots,|\mathcal{D}_p|\}\}`$. Here, $`\mathbf{a}_{p, m} \in \mathbb{R}^{T_a}`$ specifies the audio sequence of the individual, spanning a duration of $`T_a`$. Concurrently, $`\mathbf{v}_{p, m} \in \mathbb{R}^{T_v \times L \times 3}`$ describes the corresponding facial motion sequence, aligned to a reference template face $`T \in \mathbb{R}^{L \times 3}`$. The parameters $`T_v`$, $`L`$, and $`3`$ denote the length of the facial sequence, the number of facial landmarks, and the spatial coordinates $`(x, y, z)`$, respectively. The collective dataset is represented as $`\mathcal{D}=\{\mathcal{D}_p, p \in \mathcal{P}\}`$.

The final objective is to construct a model, denoted by $`f_\theta`$, by leveraging the samples from the dataset $`\mathcal{D}`$. This model is subsequently refined through fine-tuning with the personalized dataset $`P_l`$. This adaptation process enhances the model’s efficacy $`f_{\theta_l}`$ on the dataset specific to individual $`l`$. More formally, for a given task $`i`$, the query and support set are defined as $`\omega_i = \{(\mathbf{a}_{k}, \mathbf{v}_{k}), k \in \{1,2,\cdots,K_i\}\}`$, with $`K_i`$ representing the count of samples within $`\omega_i`$.

```math
\begin{equation}
\theta^* = \arg\min_{\theta} \sum_{(\mathbf{a}, \mathbf{v}) \in \mathcal{D}} \mathcal{L}(f_\theta(\mathbf{a}), \mathbf{v})
\end{equation}
```

Upon obtaining the optimal parameters $`\theta^*`$, the model is further personalized as follows:

```math
\begin{equation}
\small
\theta_l^* = \arg\min_{\theta} ( \lambda \sum_{(\mathbf{a}, \mathbf{v}) \in P_l} \mathcal{L}(f_{\theta}(\mathbf{a}), \mathbf{v}) + (1 - \lambda) \mathcal{L}(f_{\theta^*}(\mathbf{a}), \mathbf{v}) )
\end{equation}
```

, where $`\lambda`$ is a tuning parameter that balances the influence of the personalized data $`P_l`$ against the pre-trained model parameters. Fig. <a href="#fig.structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig.structure">[fig.structure]</a> demonstrates the operational framework of MetaFace. Starting with a pre-trained 3D talking face animation model alongside a minimal training dataset, MetaFace initially engages the Robust Meta Initialization Stage to expedite the model weight updates. This stage allows the model to rapidly assimilate basic cues from a new individual efficiently. Additionally, this phase incorporates a Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process into the 3D face animation model. This enhancement facilitates the model’s ability to discern the domain disparities between previously modelled individuals and the new subject and to unearth intrinsic relationships, thereby promoting model adaptability to the speaking style domain of the new individual. Subsequently, the primed deep model undergoes refinement through the Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach. This method enhances the LoRA technique, further aiding the model in acquiring intricate details of novel speaking styles.

The following subsections delve into the intricacies of the Robust Meta Initialization Stage, the Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process, and the Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach.

## Robust Meta Initialization Stage

To equip a pretrained 3D talking face animation model with the capability to learn an individual’s unique speaking style, we begin with the Robust Meta Initialization Stage. This stage updates the model’s weights to produce an initial weight configuration. We define the audio input as $`a`$ and the face animation bias as $`v`$, while the speaking feature distribution for person $`l`$ is represented as $`p(l)`$.

Given that traditional training approaches, which compute the loss $`\tau`$ using the model $`f_{\theta}`$ over the entire batch, may not adequately address unseen speaking styles, we employ a strategy inspired by . This involves training a meta face model as a robust initialization for adapting to new samples.

For a new individual $`l`$, we construct a person-specific dataset $`\mathcal{D}_l`$ containing $`K_l`$ samples drawn from the distribution of speaking features of person $`l`$. Each sample consists of audio $`a`$ and face motion bias $`v`$. The model is initially updated using the gradients calculated from the performance of model $`\theta`$ on these $`K_l`$ samples, as indicated in Equation <a href="#equ.update" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="equ.update">[equ.update]</a>:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \hat{\theta}_p = \hat{\theta}_l - \alpha \nabla_{\hat{\theta}} \sum_i \tau(f_{\hat{\theta}_l}(a_l, l), v_l)
    \label{equ.update}
\end{equation}
```

The parameters $`\hat{\theta}_p`$, updated locally, are deemed optimal for the dataset $`\mathcal{D}_p`$. To verify the precision of these parameters, we resample another $`K`$ observations $`\phi'`$ from $`p(l)`$, which are used as a query set to compute the gradient through the loss $`\tau(f_{\hat{\theta}}(a', l), V')`$. Subsequently, the original model parameters $`\theta`$ are refined using the following update rule:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \theta = \theta - \beta \nabla_{\theta} \sum_{l=1}^{K} \tau(f_{\hat{\theta}_l}(a_l, l), v_l)
    \label{equ.maml}
\end{equation}
```

,where $`\beta`$ is the learning rate. Detailed procedures of meta-face algorithm are delineated in Algorithm <a href="#alg3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="alg3">[alg3]</a>.

## Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach

Following the Robust Meta Initialization Stage, the subsequent phase involves the meticulous model fine-tuning. This crucial step enables the model to assimilate additional, intricate details specific to each individual. The fine-tuning process is pivotal as it refines the model’s ability to capture and replicate the nuanced characteristics inherent in the speaking style of the subject, thereby enhancing the overall adaptability and effectiveness of the model. Given the impracticality of maintaining a fully adaptive model for each individual, we adopt a strategy that leverages a low-rank decomposition approach, as suggested by , to reduce the memory footprint significantly. Specifically, for the linear layers’ weight matrix $`\mathbf{X} \in \mathbb{R}^{w \times o}`$ within the model parameters $`\theta`$, we apply a low-rank decomposition. Traditionally, updates to the linear parameters are performed as $`\mathbf{X} = \mathbf{X} + \Delta\mathbf{X}`$. However, in our approach, these updates are replaced by $`\mathbf{X} = \mathbf{X} + \Delta\mathbf{B}\mathbf{A}`$, where $`\mathbf{B} \in \mathbb{R}^{w \times u}`$ and $`\mathbf{A} \in \mathbb{R}^{u \times o}`$ are the low-rank matrices and $`u`$ denotes the predefined dimensions, significantly less than $`w`$ or $`o`$.

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathbf{X}_{new} = \mathbf{X} + \Delta\mathbf{B}\mathbf{A}
\end{equation}
```

For the entire model’s parameters $`\theta`$, we construct a low-rank product $`\theta_m`$ to update the personality network. To enhance the adaptive capacity of the model concerning individual speaking styles, we propose that the LoRA parameters $`\theta_m`$ should also be concurrently trained with $`\theta`$ during the meta-learning phase. This dual training process involves $`\theta`$ and $`\theta_m`$ when training the meta face.

```math
\begin{equation}
    \theta_{final} = \text{Train}(\theta, \theta_m)
\end{equation}
```

Notably, while traditional approaches typically initialize the LoRA parameters randomly during fine-tuning, we innovate by initializing $`\theta_m`$ using meta-learning techniques. This initialization contributes to memory reduction and enhances the model’s ability to capture detailed nuances of the speaking style. During the fine-tuning phase on a specific individual, only the $`\theta_m`$ parameters are updated, thereby maintaining a low memory footprint while fine-tuning to adapt to the unique characteristics of the individual’s speaking style.

## Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process

In the Robust Meta Initialization Stage, as detailed in Section <a href="#meta_learning" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="meta_learning">4.2</a>, the updating rule considers each individual a distinct task. This approach inadvertently neglects the potential facial correlations among individuals, where similarly characterized persons might exhibit akin facial movements. Harnessing these correlations could significantly bolster the training of the meta-parameters. We have introduced the Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process to tap into and exploit these correlations.

Specifically, for each task $`\omega_i = \{\mathcal{D}_l , l \in \mathcal{S}_i \cup \mathcal{Q}_i\}`$, we postulate that $`\omega_i`$ emanates from a stochastic process $`h_i`$, with each data point $`(\mathbf{a}_{k}, \mathbf{v}_{k})`$ epitomizing a sample from $`h_i`$. The conditional probability distribution $`p(\mathbf{v}_{1:K_i}|\mathbf{a}_{1:K_i})`$ can be delineated as follows:

```math
\begin{align}
    p(\mathbf{v}_{1:K_i}|\mathbf{a}_{1:K_i}) = \int p(h_i) p(\mathbf{v}_{1:K_i}|\mathbf{a}_{1:K_i}, h_i) d h_i
\end{align}
```

where $`\mathbf{a}_{1:K_i}`$ and $`\mathbf{v}_{1:K_i}`$ represent all samples $`(\mathbf{a}_{k}, \mathbf{v}_{k})`$ from task $`\omega_i`$, respectively, and $`K_i = |\omega_i|`$ denotes the count of samples in $`\omega_i`$. The Neural Process approximates the stochastic process $`h_i`$ using a random vector $`p(\mathbf{z}_i)`$, reformulating the equation as:

```math
\begin{align}
    p(\mathbf{v}_{1:K_i}|\mathbf{a}_{1:K_i}) = \int p(\mathbf{z}_i) \prod^{K_i}_{k=1}p(\mathbf{v}_{k}|\mathbf{a}_{k}, \mathbf{z}_i) d \mathbf{z}_i
\end{align}
```

Given the intractability of the posterior distribution, the Neural Process employs variational inference, introducing a variational posterior $`q(\mathbf{z}_i|\omega_i)`$. The Evidence Lower-BOund (ELBO) is thus derived as:

```math
\begin{equation}
\scriptsize
    \log p(\mathbf{v}_{1:K_i}|\mathbf{a}_{1:K_i}) \geq \mathbb{E}_{q(\mathbf{z}_i|\omega_i)} \left[ \sum_{k=1}^{K_i} \log p(\mathbf{v}_k|\mathbf{a}_k, \mathbf{z}_i) + \log \frac{p(\mathbf{z}_i)}{q(\mathbf{z}_i|\omega_i)} \right]
\end{equation}
```

For simplicity, let us assume $`p(\mathbf{z}_i) \sim \mathcal{N}(\mathbf{0}, \mathbf{I})`$. Considering each task $`\omega_i`$ is comprised of a support set $`\mathcal{S}_i`$ and a query set $`\mathcal{Q}_i`$, the ELBO is reformulated to enhance training efficiency:

```math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \log &p(\mathbf{v}_{1:|\mathcal{Q}_i|}|\mathbf{a}_{1:|\mathcal{Q}_i|}, \mathcal{S}_i)  \geq \\
    &\mathbb{E}_{q(\mathbf{z}_i|\mathcal{Q}_i)}  \left[  \sum^{\mathcal{Q}_i}_{k=1} \log p(\mathbf{v}_{k}|\mathbf{a}_{k}, \mathbf{z}_i)  +  \text{KL}(q(\mathbf{z}_i|\mathcal{Q}_i) || q(\mathbf{z}_i|\mathcal{S}_i)) \right]
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

Here, the first term is interpreted as the reconstruction loss for 3D facial animation, and the second term serves as a regularization term, fostering consistency between the support set and the query set.

## Loss Function

To train MetaFace, we employ three distinct loss functions: a reconstruction loss, a velocity loss, and a Lnp Loss.

The reconstruction loss measures the distance between the predicted facial motion bias $`V_{\text{pred}}`$ and the ground truth $`V_{\text{gt}}`$, as shown in Equation <a href="#equ:recon" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="equ:recon">[equ:recon]</a>.

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{equ:recon}
    \tau_{\text{recon}} = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{n=1}^{N} (V_{\text{pred}, n} - V_{\text{gt}, n})^2
\end{equation}
```

To minimize jittery outputs, following , we use a velocity term to ensure the model learns the facial motion velocity:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{equ:vel}
    \tau_{\text{vel}} = \frac{1}{T-1} \sum_{t=2}^T \left(\frac{1}{N} \sum_{n=1}^N (V_{\text{pred}, n}^t - V_{\text{pred}, n}^{t-1} - (V_{\text{gt}, n}^t - V_{\text{gt}, n}^{t-1}))^2\right)
\end{equation}
```

For the Lnp loss, as previously discussed, the loss function $`\tau_{\text{lnp}}`$ can be formulated as:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{equ:Lnp}
    \tau_{\text{lnp}} = \sum_i p(z_i \mid a_Q) \log\left(\frac{p(z_i \mid a_Q)}{p(z_i \mid a_S)}\right)
\end{equation}
```

The total loss function can be formulated as:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \label{equ:total_loss}
    \tau = w_1 \tau_{\text{recon}} + w_2 \tau_{\text{vel}} + w_3 \tau_{\text{lnp}}
\end{equation}
```

where $`w_1`$, $`w_2`$, and $`w_3`$ are hyperparameters that indicate the weight of each corresponding loss component.

# Experiments

## Experimental details

To assess the efficacy of MetaFace, we conduct experiments using two publicly recognized datasets: VOCASet and BIWI . VOCASet includes 480 sentences, each lasting between three to four seconds, captured from 12 subjects using 4D scans at a rate of 60 fps. The BIWI dataset contains 15,000 frames featuring 20 subjects engaged in speech, captured at 25 fps. We sample the audio at 16 kHz and extract audio features using the wav2vec model . In our meta-learning framework, we select an 11-way 1-shot pretraining strategy. The global learning rate is set at $`\alpha = 1 \times 10^{-4}`$, and the fine-tuning learning rate is $`\beta = 5 \times 10^{-5}`$. Loss weights are assigned as follows: $`w_{\text{recon}} = 1000`$, $`w_{\text{vel}} = 1000`$, and $`w_{\text{Lnp}} = 10`$. During the task-specific fine-tuning stage, we use four samples from the training sentences of the test subjects, following the methodology described in the imitator model. For evaluation, we measure the L2 vertex error across the entire face ($`l2_{\text{face}}`$) and within the lip regions ($`l2_{\text{lip}}`$) to assess the accuracy of the facial animations. Additionally, we employ Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) to evaluate lip synchronization ($`lip_{\text{sync}}`$) as per the method outlined by . We also gauge performance using the mean of the maximum error per frame ($`lip_{\text{max}}`$), following the approach described by .

## Quantitative Evaluation

We compare MetaFace with leading-edge methodologies such as VOCA , FaceFormer , SelfTalk , StyleTalk , and Imitator . For VOCA, it is trained on the BIWI dataset employing the official implementation. FaceFormer, SelfTalk, and StyleTalk undergo external experiments, specifically fine-tuned on four sentences arbitrarily selected from the training set of the test subjects, in alignment with the practices delineated by . Similarly, MetaFace is trained on four samples from the training set of the test subjects. As delineated in Table <a href="#tab.main" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab.main">[tab.main]</a>, MetaFace outperforms all compared methods in terms of reduced facial animation errors and enhanced lip synchronization. These exemplary results signify substantial enhancements in both overall facial movements and lip motions. More precisely, MetaFace registers a 31% reduction in facial motion distance and a 9.2% reduction in lip synchronization distances on the VOCASet, surpassing the personalized talking face generation benchmarks set by . On the BIWI dataset, MetaFace achieves a 30% reduction in whole face motion error and a 22% improvement in lip synchronization error.

## Qualitative Evaluation

In addition to the quantitative comparisons, we also present a series of visualization results in Fig.<a href="#fig.example" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig.example">[fig.example]</a>. We conduct comparisons of our model, MetaFace, against established methods such as VOCA, FaceFormer, SelfTalk, and Imitator on the VOCASet, and with FaceFormer, SelfTalk, and TalkingStyle on the BIWI dataset. Each method is fine-tuned using four samples from the target individual. The images used for this comparative analysis are extracted from videos included in our supplementary materials. As illustrated in Fig.<a href="#fig.example" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig.example">[fig.example]</a>, MetaFace evidently surpasses the competing methods in terms of visual outcomes. Notably, when articulating the sound /u/, MetaFace exhibits the most lifelike facial movements, with the mouth forming a semicircle and slightly protruding forward. For closed syllables such as /pe/ and /p/, the movements of the mouth shapes with MetaFace are markedly more restrained compared to other methods. Similarly, for open syllables like /i/ and /ae/, our method aligns more closely with the ground truth results

## User study

To explore the practical efficacy of 3D face animation, we conduct a user study using existing datasets, adhering to the methodologies established by FaceFormer , Imitator , and SelfTalk . In this study, participants view videos from each method side-by-side and select the most realistic animation. We compute the support ratio for each method to quantify preference. MetaFace is compared against SelfTalk and Imitator, which are recognized as leading models in personalized talking face animation and lip synchronization. As depicted in Table <a href="#tab.user_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab.user_study">[tab.user_study]</a>, our method surpasses other models in terms of lip synchronization and overall realism. Notably, MetaFace achieves a support ratio of 66.4% against Imitator on the VOCASet, emphasizing its superior performance in realistic facial animation.

## Ablation Study

In this section, we conduct an ablation study to demonstrate the effectiveness of our key design components. The experiments are conducted on the VOCASet, with results presented in Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">[tab:ablation]</a>.

**Impact of the Robust Meta Initialization Stage:** The primary objective of MetaFace is to learn a meta face that serves as an initialization for all faces. As illustrated in the third row of Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">[tab:ablation]</a>, the robust meta initialization contributes significantly to the overall performance. Specifically, this meta-learning approach results in a 24.4% decrease in $`l2_{face}`$ and a 25.7% decrease in $`lip_{sync}`$.

**Impact of the Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process:** This component enables MetaFace to discern the relationship between observed speaking styles and unobserved ones. As shown in Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">[tab:ablation]</a>, the contribution of the Neural Process primarily leads to a 14.4% reduction in the maximum $`l2`$ distance within the lip region and an 11% reduction in lip synchronization distance.

**Impact of the Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach** As indicated in the first row of Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">[tab:ablation]</a>, the model excluding LoRA (Low-Rank Adaptation) achieves the most favorable outcomes. While utilizing the full model parameters delivers optimal performance, it concurrently necessitates a hundredfold increase in model parameter training requirements. The integration of the LoRA model substantially reduces trainable parameters by approximately 99.5%, with a modest performance decrease not exceeding 7%. From the second row of Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">[tab:ablation]</a>, it is evident that meta-learning plays a crucial role in enhancing outcomes. Meta training of the low-rank decomposition module improves lip synchronization by 17% and reduces face motion error by 16%.

## Generalization Test towards Adaptation Samples

We also investigate the generalization ability of our model concerning the number of adaptation samples. In our experiments, we vary the number of seen sample sequences and train the model with randomly selected sentences. Results, shown in Table <a href="#tab.number" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab.number">[tab.number]</a>, indicate that increasing the sample count significantly reduces the $`l2_{face}`$ error. Specifically, using four sentences decreases the error by up to 36%, demonstrating that a greater number of samples notably improves the model’s generalization capability in facial feature reconstruction.

# Conclusion

In this paper, we have introduced MetaFace, a novel model for audio-driven 3D face animation that addresses the challenge of personalized speaking style adaptation. MetaFace comprises three key components: the Robust Meta Initialization Stage (RMIS), which facilitates fundamental speaking style adaptation; the Dynamic Relation Mining Neural Process (DRMN), which establishes connections between observed and unobserved speaking styles; and the Low-rank Matrix Memory Reduction Approach, which enhances the efficiency of model optimization and the learning of style details. By integrating these novel designs, MetaFace not only significantly surpasses robust existing baselines but also sets a new benchmark in the field.

## References

1. Achiam, J.; Adler, S.; Agarwal, S.; Ahmad, L.; Akkaya, I.; Aleman, F.~L.; Almeida, D.; Altenschmidt, J.; Altman, S.; Anadkat, S.; et~al. 2023.
   \newblock Gpt-4 technical report.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774}. [arXiv:2303.08774](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774)
2. Baevski, A.; Zhou, Y.; Mohamed, A.; and Auli, M. 2020.
   \newblock wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
   \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33: 12449--12460.
3. Black, A.; Taylor, P.; Caley, R.; and Clark, R. 1998.
   \newblock The festival speech synthesis system.
4. Brown, T.; Mann, B.; Ryder, N.; Subbiah, M.; Kaplan, J.~D.; Dhariwal, P.; Neelakantan, A.; Shyam, P.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; et~al. 2020.
   \newblock Language models are few-shot learners.
   \newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33: 1877--1901.
5. Chai, Y.; Shao, T.; Weng, Y.; and Zhou, K. 2024.
   \newblock Personalized Audio-Driven 3D Facial Animation via Style-Content Disentanglement.
   \newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics}, 30(3): 1803--1820.
6. Cho, K.; Lee, J.; Yoon, H.; Hong, Y.; Ko, J.; Ahn, S.; and Kim, S. 2024.
   \newblock GaussianTalker: Real-Time Talking Head Synthesis with 3D Gaussian Splatting.
   \newblock In \emph{ACM Multimedia 2024}.
7. Cudeiro, D.; Bolkart, T.; Laidlaw, C.; Ranjan, A.; and Black, M.~J. 2019.
   \newblock Capture, learning, and synthesis of 3D speaking styles.
   \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, 10101--10111.
8. Dan{\v{e}}{\v{c}}ek, R.; Chhatre, K.; Tripathi, S.; Wen, Y.; Black, M.; and Bolkart, T. 2023.
   \newblock Emotional speech-driven animation with content-emotion disentanglement.
   \newblock In \emph{SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers}, 1--13.
9. Dettmers, T.; Pagnoni, A.; Holtzman, A.; and Zettlemoyer, L. 2024.
   \newblock Qlora: Efficient finetuning of quantized llms.
   \newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 36.
10. Devlin, J.; Chang, M.-W.; Lee, K.; and Toutanova, K. 2018.
    \newblock Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.04805}. [arXiv:1810.04805](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.04805)
11. Du, Y.; Liu, Z.; Li, J.; and Zhao, W.~X. 2022.
    \newblock A survey of vision-language pre-trained models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.10936}. [arXiv:2202.10936](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.10936)
12. Ezzat, T.; and Poggio, T. 1998.
    \newblock Miketalk: A talking facial display based on morphing visemes.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings Computer Animation'98 (Cat. No. 98EX169)}, 96--102. IEEE.
13. Ezzat, T.; and Poggio, T. 2000.
    \newblock Visual speech synthesis by morphing visemes.
    \newblock \emph{International Journal of Computer Vision}, 38: 45--57.
14. Fan, Y.; Lin, Z.; Saito, J.; Wang, W.; and Komura, T. 2022.
    \newblock Faceformer: Speech-driven 3d facial animation with transformers.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, 18770--18780.
15. Fanelli, G.; Gall, J.; Romsdorfer, H.; Weise, T.; and Van~Gool, L. 2010.
    \newblock A 3-d audio-visual corpus of affective communication.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, 12(6): 591--598.
16. Finn, C.; Abbeel, P.; and Levine, S. 2017.
    \newblock Model-agnostic meta-learning for fast adaptation of deep networks.
    \newblock In \emph{International conference on machine learning}, 1126--1135. PMLR.
17. Fisher, C.~G. 1968.
    \newblock Confusions among visually perceived consonants.
    \newblock \emph{Journal of speech and hearing research}, 11(4): 796--804.
18. Fu, H.; Wang, Z.; Gong, K.; Wang, K.; Chen, T.; Li, H.; Zeng, H.; and Kang, W. 2024.
    \newblock Mimic: Speaking Style Disentanglement for Speech-Driven 3D Facial Animation.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence}, volume~38, 1770--1777.
19. Hospedales, T.; Antoniou, A.; Micaelli, P.; and Storkey, A. 2021.
    \newblock Meta-learning in neural networks: A survey.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence}, 44(9): 5149--5169.
20. Hu, E.~J.; Shen, Y.; Wallis, P.; Allen-Zhu, Z.; Li, Y.; Wang, S.; Wang, L.; and Chen, W. 2021{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685}. [arXiv:2106.09685](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685)
21. Hu, L.; Zhang, B.; Zhang, P.; Qi, J.; Cao, J.; Gao, D.; Zhao, H.; Feng, X.; Wang, Q.; Zhuo, L.; et~al. 2021{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock A Virtual character generation and animation system for e-commerce live streaming.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, 1202--1211.
22. Huisman, M.; Van~Rijn, J.~N.; and Plaat, A. 2021.
    \newblock A survey of deep meta-learning.
    \newblock \emph{Artificial Intelligence Review}, 54(6): 4483--4541.
23. Karras, T.; Aila, T.; Laine, S.; Herva, A.; and Lehtinen, J. 2017.
    \newblock Audio-driven facial animation by joint end-to-end learning of pose and emotion.
    \newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 36(4): 1--12.
24. Lin, J.; Yuan, Y.; and Zou, Z. 2021.
    \newblock Meingame: Create a game character face from a single portrait.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence}, volume~35, 311--319.
25. Peng, Z.; Hu, W.; Shi, Y.; Zhu, X.; Zhang, X.; Zhao, H.; He, J.; Liu, H.; and Fan, Z. 2024.
    \newblock Synctalk: The devil is in the synchronization for talking head synthesis.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, 666--676.
26. Peng, Z.; Luo, Y.; Shi, Y.; Xu, H.; Zhu, X.; Liu, H.; He, J.; and Fan, Z. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
    \newblock Selftalk: A self-supervised commutative training diagram to comprehend 3d talking faces.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, 5292--5301.
27. Peng, Z.; Wu, H.; Song, Z.; Xu, H.; Zhu, X.; He, J.; Liu, H.; and Fan, Z. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
    \newblock Emotalk: Speech-driven emotional disentanglement for 3d face animation.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, 20687--20697.
28. Richard, A.; Zollh{\"o}fer, M.; Wen, Y.; De~la Torre, F.; and Sheikh, Y. 2021.
    \newblock Meshtalk: 3d face animation from speech using cross-modality disentanglement.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, 1173--1182.
29. Song, W.; Wang, X.; Zheng, S.; Li, S.; Hao, A.; and Hou, X. 2024.
    \newblock TalkingStyle: Personalized Speech-Driven 3D Facial Animation with Style Preservation.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics}.
30. Thambiraja, B.; Habibie, I.; Aliakbarian, S.; Cosker, D.; Theobalt, C.; and Thies, J. 2023.
    \newblock Imitator: Personalized speech-driven 3d facial animation.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, 20621--20631.
31. Tian, G.; Yuan, Y.; and Liu, Y. 2019.
    \newblock Audio2face: Generating speech/face animation from single audio with attention-based bidirectional lstm networks.
    \newblock In \emph{2019 IEEE international conference on Multimedia \& Expo Workshops (ICMEW)}, 366--371. IEEE.
32. Wang, H.; Li, J.; Wu, H.; Hovy, E.; and Sun, Y. 2022.
    \newblock Pre-trained language models and their applications.
    \newblock \emph{Engineering}.
33. Wang, Z.; Lu, C.; Wang, Y.; Bao, F.; Li, C.; Su, H.; and Zhu, J. 2024.
    \newblock Prolificdreamer: High-fidelity and diverse text-to-3d generation with variational score distillation.
    \newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 36.
34. Wirth, K.~R.; and Perkins, D. 2008.
    \newblock Learning to learn.
35. Xing, J.; Xia, M.; Zhang, Y.; Cun, X.; Wang, J.; and Wong, T.-T. 2023.
    \newblock Codetalker: Speech-driven 3d facial animation with discrete motion prior.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, 12780--12790.
36. Zhang, C.; Ni, S.; Fan, Z.; Li, H.; Zeng, M.; Budagavi, M.; and Guo, X. 2021.
    \newblock 3d talking face with personalized pose dynamics.
    \newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics}, 29(2): 1438--1449.
37. Zhang, L.; Rao, A.; and Agrawala, M. 2023.
    \newblock Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, 3836--3847.
