---
arxiv_id: '2410.06734'
title: 'MimicTalk: Mimicking a personalized and expressive 3D talking face in minutes'
authors:
- Zhenhui Ye
- Tianyun Zhong
- Yi Ren
- Ziyue Jiang
- Jiawei Huang
- Rongjie Huang
- Jinglin Liu
- Jinzheng He
- Chen Zhang
- Zehan Wang
- Xize Chen
- Xiang Yin
- Zhou Zhao
submitted: '2024-10-09'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06734
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 18/64
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:17:36+00:00'
references_parsed: 64
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Audio-driven talking face generation (TFG) is a cross-modal task that leverages multi-modal knowledge from speech, vision, and computer graphics to animate a target identity’s face given arbitrary driving audio, aiming to create lifelike talking videos or interactive avatars. Personalized TFG is a variant of TFG with several real-world applications, such as video conferencing and audio-visual chatbots, in which we emphasize that the generated results should have excellent perceptual similarity to a specific individual (from the perspective of both visual quality and expressiveness). In this setting, a video clip of the target identity (from several seconds to minutes) is provided as a detailed reference for the target person’s personalized attributes, such as geometry shape and talking style . To meet the quality requirement of high perceptual identity similarity, the community has focused on identity-dependent methods , in which an individual model is trained from scratch for each target person’s video. The primary reason for the prevailing of these identity-dependent approaches is that during the training process, the person-specific model can implicitly memorize nuanced personalized details of the target person’s video, such as their speaking style and subtle expressions, which are hard to represent explicitly with hand-crafted conditions. As a result, these approaches could train small-scale person-dependent models, achieving high identity similarity and expressive results.

However, the identity-dependent methods face two well-known challenges: (1) the first is weak generalizability. The limited training data scale in the per-identity-per-training restricts the generalizability to out-of-domain (OOD) conditions during inference. For example, lip-sync performance may degrade when driven by OOD audio (from a different language or speaker), and the rendering may fail when synthesizing OOD expressions (such as large yaw). (2) the second is low training and sample efficiency. Since the identity-dependent model needs to be trained from scratch on the target person video and no prior knowledge can be enjoyed, the training process can take more than several hours (low training efficiency), and it often requires over 1-minute length of training data to achieve reasonable lip-sync results (low sample efficiency). By contrast, another line of works, the identity-agnostic (or, say, one-shot) TFG methods , which incorporate various identities’ video during training and only use one source image during inference, can achieve good generalizability to OOD conditions since various audio/expressions have been seen during the training. However, due to the limited information in the single input image, the one-shot methods cannot exploit the rich samples of the target identity to imitate its personalized attributes. Therefore, it is promising to bridge the gap between person-agnostic one-shot methods and person-dependent small-scale models to achieve expressive, generalized, and efficient personalized TFG.

The contributions of the paper are summarized as follows:

- We are the first work that considers utilizing 3D person-agnostic models for personalized TFG. We propose an SD-hybrid pipeline for efficient and high-quality adaptation to learning the static and dynamic characteristics of the target speakers.

- We propose the ICS-A2M model, which achieves high lip-sync quality and in-context talking style mimicking audio-driven TFG.

- Our MimicTalk only requires a few seconds long reference video as the training data and several minutes for training. Experiments show that our MimicTalk surpasses previous person-dependent baselines in terms of both expressiveness and video quality while achieving 47x times faster convergence.

# Related Work

Our work is mainly about personalized and expressive talking face generation. We discuss the related works in the field of talking face generation and expressive co-speech facial motion generation, respectively.

## Talking Face Generation

Based on different real-world applications, talking face generation (TFG) methods have been majorly divided into two settings: identity-agnostic and identity-dependent. The identity-agnostic methods focus on the one-shot scenario: the model is provided with only one image and aims to animate it to create a video. These approaches hence train a large-scale generic model with a large amount of identity video data so that it can generalize to unseen photos during the inference stage. On the other hand, identity-dependent methods focus on achieving better video quality for a specific speaker: typically using a segment of the target user’s video as training data and expecting the model to mimic the personalized features of that speaker, known as personalized TFG. These two lines of work have evolved independently over the years and have developed significantly different methodologies. (1) As for the **person-agnostic** methods, the earliest works typically adopt a pixel-to-pixel framework or generative adversarial network (GAN) setting to generate the result, which results in training instability and bad visual quality. Then, the majority of prior works resort to a dense warping field to deform the pixels of the source image given the 3D-aware keypoints extracted from the driving resource. The warping-based method achieves better image fidelity, yet due to a lack of 3D prior knowledge, it occasionally produces warping and distortion artifacts. Recently, to handle these artifacts, some work propose one-shot NeRF-based methods by learning to reconstruct a 3D face representation (tri-plane) from the source image. (2) As for the **person-dependent setting** , which trains an individual model on a specific video of the target identity, the recent works are mainly based on NeRF for its high image fidelity and realistic 3D modeling. Despite the NeRF-based person-specific method achieving the best video quality and identity similarity among all TFG methods, it typically requires hours of training, and its generalizability to driving conditions is hampered by limited training data. To our knowledge, Mimictalk is the first work that considers bridging the gap between NeRF-based person-agnostic and person-dependent methods to improve the task of personalized TFG.

## Expressive Facial Motion Generation

The recent advance in neural rendering has significantly improved the image quality, temporal consistency, and stability of the synthesized video, making expressiveness the next focus of the TFG community. The critical challenge in achieving high expressiveness is to generate high-quality facial motion from audio content. This requires the generated motion sequence to not only synchronize with the audio track but also reflect a consistent and expressive talking style similar to the target speaker. Some studies implicitly model this process in a deterministic and end-to-end audio-to-image model . For better controllability and audio-lip synchronization, other works propose explicitly modeling the audio-to-motion mapping using external generative models . However, these studies do not explicitly model the speaker’s talking style. To address this, and developed a style vector extracted from arbitrary motion sequences to achieve explicit talking style control. EMMN disentangles expression styles and lip motion, constructing a memory bank to produce lip-synced videos with vivid expressions. A concurrent work, VASA-1 , proposes to add previous audio/motion latent as the input of the latent diffusion model to keep temporal consistency. We can see that most previous methods rely on intermediates to represent the talking style , risking information loss. In contrast, our method first achieves in-context-learning (ICL) talking style control, better preserving the target identity’s talking style.

# MimicTalk

<figure id="fig:infer" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="figs/overall.pdf" />
<figcaption>The inference process of MimicTalk. We use an in-context stylized audio-to-motion model to produce expressive facial motion mimicking the talking style of a reference video. Then, a personalized renderer could render high-quality talking face videos that mimic the static and dynamic visual attributes of the target identity.</figcaption>
</figure>

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:infer" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:infer">1</a>, MimicTalk is a personalized and expressive 3D talking face generation framework, in which the personalized renderer inherits the rich facial knowledge from a person-agnostic generic model (discussed in Sec. <a href="#sec:oneshot" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:oneshot">3.1</a>) via a static-dynamic (SD)-hybrid adaptation pipeline (in Sec. <a href="#sec:adapt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:adapt">3.2</a>). In Sec. <a href="#sec:icl_audio2motion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:icl_audio2motion">3.3</a>, we propose an in-context stylized audio-to-motion (ICS-A2M) model to generate personalized facial motion, which is necessary to achieve high expressiveness in the generated video. We describe the design and training process in the following sections. Due to space limitations, we provide technical details in Appendix <a href="#app:method" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:method">8</a>.

## NeRF-based Person-Agnostic Renderer

The previous personalized TFG works trained a separate model on the target speaker to memorize personalized information of the target person, in which NeRF is typically used as the underlying technology to better store the target speaker’s geometry, texture, and other information. We aim to leverage the prior knowledge of pre-trained person-agnostic TFG models to achieve greater generalizability and efficiency than previous person-dependent methods. To this end, we resort to recent one-shot NeRF-based TFG works to construct a person-agnostic TFG model. Specifically, We build our base model on the basis of Real3D-Portrait with its official implementation [^4]. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:train1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:train1">2</a>, the first step is reconstructing a canonical 3D face (formulated as tri-plane representation ) from the target person’s source image $`\mathbf{I}_\text{src}`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathbf{P}_\text{cano} = \texttt{FaceRecon}(\mathbf{I}_\text{src}),
\end{equation}
```
where `FaceRecon` is an image-to-3D face reconstruction model based on SegFormer that transforms the input image into a tri-plane representation . Then a light-weight SegFormer-based motion adapter could control the facial expression in the 3D face, and a volume renderer of Mip-NeRF could render the dynamic talking face of arbitrary head pose by controlling the camera:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathbf{I}_\text{raw} = \texttt{VolumeRenderer}(\mathbf{P}_\text{cano} + \texttt{MotionAdapter}([\mathbf{PNCC}_\text{src}, \mathbf{PNCC}_\text{tgt}]), \mathbf{cam}_\text{tgt}),
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathbf{PNCC}_\text{src}`$ and $`\mathbf{PNCC}_\text{tgt}`$ are projected normalized coordinate codes , which is rasterized from the 3DMM face of the source and target image, and $`\mathbf{cam}_\text{drv}`$ is the driving camera to control the head pose. $`\mathbf{I}_\text{raw}`$ is the volume-rendered low-resolution image, which is further processed by a super-resolution module to generate the final high-resolution result:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathbf{I}_\text{pred} = \texttt{SuperResolution}(\mathbf{I}_\text{raw})
\end{equation}
```
We provide detailed network structure of the `FaceRecon`, `MotionAdapter`, `VolumeRenderer`, and `SuperResolution` of person-agnostic renderer in Fig. <a href="#fig:network_structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:network_structure">5</a> of Appendix <a href="#app:method" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:method">8</a>. For more details about the one-shot person-agnostic base model, please refer to .

## Static-Dynamic-Hybrid Identity Adaptation

<figure id="fig:train1" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="figs/new_fig2.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption>The training process of the personalized TFG renderer via the static-dynamic (SD)-hybrid adaptation pipeline. We adopt a pretrained one-shot person-agnostic 3D TFG model as the backbone, then fine-tune a person-dependent 3D face representation to memorize the <em>static</em> geometry and texture details. We also inject LoRA units into the backbone to learn the personalized <em>dynamic</em> features.</figcaption>
</figure>

With the pre-trained person-agnostic renderer introduced in Sec. <a href="#sec:oneshot" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:oneshot">3.1</a>, we could synthesize talking face videos for unseen identities without any adaptation. However, there exists a significant identity similarity gap between the un-tuned renderer and previous person-dependent methods, which is reflected in two aspects: (1) The *static similarity*, which measures whether the generated frame has same texture (e.g., wrinkles, teeth, and hair) or geometry details as the target identity; (2) The *dynamic similarity*, which describes the relationship between the input motion condition and the facial muscle/torso movement in the output facial image. To be more intuitive, trained on the large-scale talking face dataset with various speakers, our person-agnostic model learns a statistically averaged motion-to-image mapping for face animation, which produces talking person videos that are semantically correct yet lack personalized characteristics. By contrast, the previous person-dependent methods, by overfitting the model on one target identity, inherently learn the personalized motion-to-image mapping in the model. Based on the observation above, we propose an efficient *static-dynamic-hybrid (SD-Hybrid) adaptation pipeline* to achieve good static/dynamic identity similarity, which is shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:train1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:train1">2</a>.

**Tri-Plane Inversion for Static Similarity.** The canonical 3D face representation $`\mathbf{P}_\text{cano}`$, which is extracted from the source image by the pre-trained 3D face reconstruction model , stores all static properties of the target identity (i.e., geometry and texture information). We find that the information loss in this feed-forward image-to-3D transform is the primary reason for the inferior static similarity in our method. To this end, inspired by previous GAN-inversion methods , we propose a tri-plane inversion technique, which regards the canonical 3D face representation as a learnable parameter and optimizes it to maximize the static identity similarity. To be specific, as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:train1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:train1">2</a>, when adapting our model to a specific identity given a video clip, we initialize the learnable tri-plane with the first frame’s image-to-3D prediction, then optimize the tri-plane alongside other parameters.

**Injecting LoRAs for Dynamic Similarity.** As for dynamic similarity, since the person-agnostic model learns averaged motion-to-image mapping in the multi-speaker talking face dataset, we need to adapt the generic model specifically to the target person’s video to learn its personalized facial dynamics. A naive solution is to directly fine-tune the whole model or the last few layers on the target person’s video. However, considering the large model capacity and the small data scale of the target person’s video, it faces several challenges, such as high GPU memory footprints, training instability, and catastrophic forgetting. To this end, we resort to low-rank adaptation (LoRA) , which was initially proposed for efficient adaptation of language models and recently extended to computer vision applications such as text-to-image synthesis . As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:lora" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:lora">6</a> of Appendix <a href="#app:trigrid_lora" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:trigrid_lora">8.2</a>, LoRAs can be conveniently plugged into our person-agnostic model by injecting a low-rank learnable matrix to every linear layer and convolution kernel. All pre-trained parameters in the person-agnostic model are fixed, and only the LoRAs are updated during training.

**Adaptation Process.** As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:train1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:train1">2</a>, with the SD-hybrid design, the rendering process of the predicted image can be expressed as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathbf{I}_\text{pred} = \text{SR}(\text{VolumeRenderer}(\mathbf{P}^*_\text{cano} + \text{MotionAdapter}([\mathbf{PNNC}_\text{src}, \mathbf{PNCC}_\text{tgt}]; \theta^*_1), \mathbf{cam}_\text{drv}; \theta^*_2); \theta^3_3),
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathbf{P}^*_\text{cano}`$ is the learnable 3D face representation, which is initialized from the first-frame prediction by the pre-trained 3D face reconstruction model. SR denotes the super-resolution module, $`\theta^*_1, \theta^*_2, \theta^*_3`$ are the learnable LoRA parameters injected in the volume renderer, motion adapter, and the super-resolution module, respectively.

During adaptation, a short video clip of a specific identity is utilized as the training data, and only the personalized tri-plane and LoRAs are updated. The training loss of the SD-hybrid adaptation is:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathcal{L}_\text{SD-Hybrid} = \mathcal{L}_{1} + \lambda_\text{LPIPS} \cdot \mathcal{L}_\text{LPIPS} +  \lambda_\text{ID} \cdot \mathcal{L}_\text{ID},
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathcal{L}_\text{1}, \mathcal{L}_\text{LPIPS},  \mathcal{L}_\text{ID},`$ denotes L1 loss, LPIPS loss by VGG16 , and identity loss by VGGFace , respectively. We set the learning rate to 0.001, $`\lambda_\text{LPIPS}=0.2`$, $`\lambda_\text{ID}=0.1`$. Thanks to the static-dynamic-hybrid design, our method achieves good identity similarity while enjoying a fast and low-memory-cost adaptation process compared to existing person-dependent methods, illustrated in Table <a href="#tab:aud_driven" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:aud_driven">[tab:aud_driven]</a>. Besides, we demonstrate that our SD-Hybrid pipeline achieves good training and sample efficiency in Fig. <a href="#fig:training_data_efficiency" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:training_data_efficiency">4</a>.

## In-Context Stylized Audio-to-Motion

In the above sections, we have proposed a unified framework for motion-conditioned talking face generation. Then, we present **in-context stylized audio-to-motion (ICS-A2M)** model to generate personalized facial motion for audio-driven scenarios.

<figure id="fig:flowmatching" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="figs/new_fig3.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption>The process of in-context stylized motion prediction. For the training process please refer to Fig. <a href="#fig:audio_guided_motion_infilling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:audio_guided_motion_infilling">7</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

#### Audio-guided Motion Filling Task

Inspired by the success of in-context learning methods in large language models and text-to-speech synthesis , we devise an audio-guided motion infilling task. We visualize the audio-guided motion-infilling task’s detailed training and inference pipeline in Fig. <a href="#fig:audio_guided_motion_infilling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:audio_guided_motion_infilling">7</a> of Appendix <a href="#app:icl_a2m" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:icl_a2m">8.3</a>. Specifically, the audio-motion pairs are temporally aligned and channel-wise concatenated and processed by the audio-to-motion model. During training, we randomly masked several segments in the motion track and trained the model with the motion reconstruction error on the masked segments. Since the model is provided with surrounding unmasked motion and the complete audio track, it learns to exploit the talking style in the motion context to predict the masked co-speech motion more accurately. During inference, as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:flowmatching" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:flowmatching">3</a> (a), we could concatenate the reference audio-motion pair as the talking style prompt, arbitrary driving audio as the condition, and a noisy placeholder for predicted motion as the input of the model. This way, the model could predict the audio-synchronized facial motion with the talking style provided in the style prompt.

#### Audio-to-Motion Flow Matching Model

We first introduce an advanced generative model, flow matching , to generate expressive facial motions. The model is parameterized by a transformer $`\theta`$ and predicts a flow field $`\phi`$ that stores the velocity $`\mathbf{v}_t = \frac{d\mathbf{x}_t}{dt}`$ of the data points $`\mathbf{x}_t`$ pointing towards the target distribution. Similar to diffusion models, the time step $`t`$ is increasing from 0 to 1 during the inference process, i.e., we have prior data points $`\mathbf{x}_0\sim N(0,1)`$ and the target data points $`\mathbf{x}_1\sim q(\mathbf{x})`$, where $`q(\mathbf{x})`$ denotes the ground truth data distribution. Due to space limitation, we provide detailed preliminaries of flow matching in Appendix <a href="#app:cfm" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:cfm">8.3.2</a>. To be intuitive, we visualize the forward process of our flow-matching-based audio-to-motion model in Fig. <a href="#fig:flowmatching" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:flowmatching">3</a> (a). The network input is the same as what we defined in the previous paragraph (a concatenation of the style prompt, audio condition, and noisy motion $`\mathbf{x}_t`$). The model’s output is the velocity $`\mathbf{v}_t`$ of the noisy motion $`\mathbf{x}_t`$. And we could train the model with the conditional flow matching (CFM) objective:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathcal{L}_\text{CFM}=\mathbb{E}_{t,q(x),p(x|x_1)} ||\mathbf{u}_t(\mathbf{x}|\mathbf{x}_1)-\mathbf{v}_t(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{s};\theta)||_2^2,
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathbf{v}_t(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{s};\theta)`$is the predicted velocity by flow matching model of parameter $`\theta`$, $`\mathbf{a}`$ and $`\mathbf{s}`$ is th audio condition and style prompt, and $`\mathbf{u}_t(\mathbf{x}|\mathbf{x}_1)`$ is the ground truth velocity of the optimal transport (OT) path given the target motion $`\mathbf{x}_1`$ and the noisy motion $`\mathbf{x}_t`$, which is exactly the unit vector pointing from $`\mathbf{x}_t`$ to $`\mathbf{x}_1`$.

Apart from the flow matching objective, we find it necessary to add a lip-sync loss on the denoised sample $`\hat{\mathbf{x}}_1`$ to generate accurate and expressive facial motion. Specifically, we first solve the ODE problem in Eq. <a href="#eq:flow_matching_ode" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:flow_matching_ode">[eq:flow_matching_ode]</a> to obtain the predicted sample $`\hat{\mathbf{x}}_1`$ using the predicted velocity $`\mathbf{v}_t(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{s};\theta)`$, then feed it into a pre-trained audio-expression SyncNet to obtain a discriminative sync loss $`\mathcal{L}_\text{sync}`$ that measure the synchronization between the input audio and the predicted expression. Therefore, the training loss of the ICS-A2M model is:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathcal{L}_\text{ICS-A2M} = \mathcal{L}_\text{CFM} + \lambda_\text{sync} \cdot \mathcal{L}_\text{sync},
\end{equation}
```
where $`\lambda_\text{sync}=0.05`$. During inference, as visualized in Fig. <a href="#fig:flowmatching" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:flowmatching">3</a>(b), now that the A2M model could predict the velocity field of the data point, we could iteratively push the data from the Gaussian distribution to the target distribution by solving the ordinary differential equation in Eq. <a href="#eq:flow_matching_ode" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:flow_matching_ode">[eq:flow_matching_ode]</a> of Appendix <a href="#app:cfm" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:cfm">8.3.2</a> and finally obtain the predicted motion $`\hat{x}_1`$ to drive the personalized renderer in Sec. <a href="#sec:adapt" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:adapt">3.2</a>.

#### Classifier-Free Guidance for Enhancing Style Mimicking

Classifier-free guidance (CFG) is a popular inference method that manipulates the condition strength during the sampling process of conditional diffusion models. While CFG has become a standard technique in text-to-image and other weak-conditioned generation tasks, we found it also helps enhance the style mimicking quality of our stylized audio-to-motion model. Specifically, we mix the two network predictions with/without style prompt to construct the CFG velocity $`\mathbf{v}^\text{CFG}_t`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathbf{v}^\text{CFG}_t = \mathbf{v}(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{s}; \theta) + w \cdot ( \mathbf{v}(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{s}; \theta) -  \mathbf{v}(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{0}; \theta)),
\end{equation}
```
where $`w`$ is the CFG scale and we empirically set $`w=2`$. $`\mathbf{v}(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{s}`$ is the network prediction with both audio condition and style prompt as the input, and $`\mathbf{v}(\mathbf{x}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{0})`$ is the predicted velocity with zero style prompt.

# Experiment

## Experimental Setup

#### Implementation Details.

[^5] We obtain the pre-trained person-agnostic renderer from the official implementation of . For the SD-Hybrid adaptation, we trained the model on 1 Nvidia A100 GPU, with a batch size of 1 and total iterations of 2,000, requiring about 8 GB of GPU memory and 0.26 hours. Regarding the ICS-A2M model, we trained it on 4 Nvidia A100 GPUs, with a batch size of 20,000 mel frames per GPU. The flow-matching-based ICS-A2M model was trained for 500,000 iterations, taking 80 hours. We provide full experiment details in Appendix <a href="#app:model_config" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:model_config">9</a>.

#### Data Preparation.

To evaluate the personalized renderers, we tested on ten 3-minute-long target person videos by and . To train the ICS-A2M model, we use a large-scale lip-reading dataset, voxceleb2 , which consists of about 2,000 hours videos from 6,112 celebrities.

#### Compared Baselines.

We compare our method with three person-dependent methods: (1) *RAD-NeRF* , (2) *GeneFace* , and (3) *ER-NeRF* . We also compare with a style-oriented TFG method that considers controlling the talking style, (4) StyleTalk . We discuss the characteristics of all test methods in Appendix <a href="#app:compare_baselines" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:compare_baselines">7</a>.

## Quantitative Evaluation

We use CSIM to measure identity preservation, PSNR, FID to measure the image quality, and AED and SyncNet confidence to measure audio-lip synchronization. The results are shown in Table <a href="#tab:aud_driven" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:aud_driven">[tab:aud_driven]</a>. We have the following observations: (1) Thanks to the powerful flow matching model and the in-context-style-mimicking ability, our method achieves the best lip accuracy (AED) and perceptual lip-sync quality (SyncNet confidence); (2) Our SD-hybrid adaptive renderer shows better visual quality than the person-specific baselines. (3) Thanks to the efficiency of the LoRA-based adaptation process, our method requires significantly less training time to adapt to a new identity within 2,000 iterations and 15 minutes (47x faster than RAD-NeRF). It also requires a low GPU memory usage (8.239 GB) for adaptation.

<span id="tab:aud_driven" label="tab:aud_driven"></span>

<div class="table*">

</div>

## Qualitative Evaluation

### Case Study

We provide demo videos at <https://mimictalk.github.io>. We also adopted several case studies to demonstrate better performance. Specifically, (1) our *SD-Hybrid adaptation has better training/sample efficiency than previous person-specific methods*; (2) our *ICS-A2M model predicts stylized facial motion*.

**Training / Sample Efficiency of SD-Hybrid Adaptation** To evaluate the training and sample efficiency of our SD-hybrid adaptation, we perform a case study of a talking video of President Obama provided by . For training efficiency, as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:training_data_efficiency" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:training_data_efficiency">4</a>(a), we adapt the model on a 180-second-long clip as the training data and use the lasting 10-second clip as the validation set. Our SD-hybrid adaptation enjoys a fast convergence and good performance compared to the person-specific baseline. As for the sample efficiency, we visualize the results of CSIM at different scales of training data in Fig. <a href="#fig:training_data_efficiency" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:training_data_efficiency">4</a>(b). It can be observed that the CSIM score improves as the amount of training data increases. Additionally, our method achieves comparable performance to the person-specific baseline, which was trained with 180 seconds of data, using only one-third of the data (60 seconds).

<figure id="fig:training_data_efficiency" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="figs/csim_over_adptation_data.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Training/data efficiency of SD-Hybrid adaptation: CSIM results at different iterations and data scales. The baseline RAD-NeRF uses 180-second-long training samples and is updated for 250,000 iterations.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Talking Style-Coherent Motion Prediction by ICS-A2M Model** <span id="app:qual_vis_icl_a2m" label="app:qual_vis_icl_a2m"></span> Given a short reference video as the talking style prompt, our ICS-A2M model could accurately mimic its talking style (such as smiling or duck mouth). We provide a demo video at <https://mimictalk.github.io/static/videos/demo_ics_a2m.mp4> for better demonstration. We also conducted a comparative mean score opinion (CMOS) test between our method and StyleTalk to qualitatively evaluate talking style accuracy. As shown in Table <a href="#tab:cmos_style" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:cmos_style">[tab:cmos_style]</a>, our method achieves better talking style controllability and identity similarity. Please refer to Appendix <a href="#app:user_study_setting" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:user_study_setting">9.3</a> for detailed user study settings.

### User study

We conducted the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) test to evaluate the perceptual quality of generated samples, scaled from 1 to 5. Following , the attendees are required to rate the videos from three aspects: (1) *identity similarity*, (2) *visual quality*, and (3) *lip-sync*. Detailed settings are in Appendix <a href="#app:user_study_setting" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:user_study_setting">9.3</a>. The results are shown in Table <a href="#tab:user_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:user_study">[tab:user_study]</a>. We have the following observations: (1) our method achieves the best lip-synchronization and identity similarity / visual quality compared to SOTA person-dependent methods (RAD-NeRF, GeneFace, and ER-NeRF). The MOS results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed MimidTalk framework.

### Ablation study

**SD-Hybrid Adaptation.** We tested two settings in the SD-Hybrid adaptation: (1) Not performing tri-plane inversion to finetune a personalized tri-plane and (2) not injecting LoRAs into the model. As shown in line 2 and line 3 of Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">[tab:ablation]</a>, utilizing both techniques achieves the best identity similarity (CSIM), visual quality (FID), and geometry accuracy (AED and APD).

**ICS-A2M Model.** We also analyze three settings in the ICS-A2M: (1) replace the flow matching model with a deterministic transformer, as shown in line 2 of Table <a href="#tab:ablation_a2m" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation_a2m">[tab:ablation_a2m]</a>, which leads to worse motion reconstruction quality and worse sync score; (2) replace the in-context style control with a hand-crafted style vector in or learn a style encoder as in StyleTalk , as shown in line 3 and line 4, which leads to worse motion reconstruction quality, proving that the ICL talking style mimicking could prevent information loss caused by compressing the style into a global encoding; (3) remove the sync loss during training, as shown in line 5, which leads to significantly worse perceptual lip-sync performance.

# Conclusion

In this paper, we propose MimicTalk, an efficient and expressive personalized talking face generation framework. We first come up with the idea of adapting a pre-trained 3D person-agnostic model to personalized datasets to inherit its generalizability and achieve fast training. The SD-Hybrid adaptation pipeline helps the generic model learn the target person’s static and dynamic features, leading to better identity similarity than previous person-dependent baselines. Besides, the proposed ICS-A2M model is the first facial motion generator that enables in-context talking style control, which helps produce expressive facial motion in the generated video. Due to space limitations, we provide impact statements in Sec. <a href="#app:ethic" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:ethic">11</a> and discuss limitations and future works in Appendix <a href="#app:limit" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:limit">10</a>.

# Acknowledgments

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62222211 and National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.62072397.

# Comparison between Different Methods

As for the person-dependent talking face **renderer**, all previous methods like RAD-NeRF , GeneFace , and ER-NeRF follow a per-identity-per-training paradigm, which means they have to learn a model from scratch for an unseen identity, which is time-consuming and the generalizability of the model is limited due to the small scale of training data. By contrast, our method is the first work to adapt a pre-trained generic one-shot 3D talking face model into the target identity. Thanks to using LoRA and the tri-plane inversion, our method could converge in 2,000 iterations (47 times faster than RAD-NeRF) and enjoy better generalizability, sample efficiency, and training efficiency due to the generic backbone.

As for the **audio-to-motion model** in the audio-driven TFG, most previous works like SadTalker and StyleTalk utilize a deterministic mapping to model the audio-to-motion transform, and cannot achieve talking style control. By contrast, our method first introduces flow-matching for the audio-to-motion task and achieves in-context talking style control.

# Model Details

## Network Structure of the Person-Agnostic Renderer

We provide detailed network structure of the person-agnostic renderer in <a href="#fig:network_structure" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:network_structure">5</a>. <span id="app:network_structure" label="app:network_structure"></span>

<figure id="fig:network_structure" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="figs/network_details.pdf" />
<figcaption>The detailed network structure of the person-agnostic renderer. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Details on LoRAs for SD-Hybrid Adaptation

We visualize a detailed process that plugs the LoRA into our person-agnostic renderer in Fig. <a href="#fig:lora" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:lora">6</a>. For each pretrained kernel or weight of shape $`c_{in}\times c_{out}`$, the LoRA Matrix A and LoRA Matrix B could represent a weight matrix of shape $`c_{in}\times c_{out}`$ and rank $`r`$, where $`r << \text{min}(c_{in}, c_{out})`$ and we set $`r=4`$ in our setting. During training, the pre-trained weights of the backbone are fixed, and only the LoRA matrices are updated.

<figure id="fig:lora" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="figs/lora.pdf" style="width:40.0%" />
<figcaption>The process that plugs LoRAs into convolutional/linear layers of the person-agnostic renderer. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Details on In-Context Stylized Audio-to-Motion Model

### Audio-Guided Motion Infilling Task

In Fig. <a href="#fig:audio_guided_motion_infilling" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:audio_guided_motion_infilling">7</a>, we present a visualization of the training and inference process for the Audio-Guided Motion Infilling task. Paired audio-motion samples are required for this task, which can be easily extracted from talking face datasets and used as training data. During training, we randomly mask several segments in the motion track and encourage the model to reconstruct them based on the complete audio track and the unmasked motion context. This training approach enables the model to learn to mimic the talking style provided in the context.

During inference, there are two main usage scenarios. Firstly, we can guide the model to mimic a specific talking style by providing an audio-motion pair of the target person as the talking style prompt. This setting allows for in-context talking style control over the generated facial motions. Alternatively, we also support audio-only motion sampling. Without a style prompt, the model will generate semantically correct facial motions with a randomly sampled talking style.

<figure id="fig:audio_guided_motion_infilling" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="figs/icl_audio2motion.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption>The training process and inference usage of the Audio-Guided Motion Infilling Task.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Preliminaries on Flow Matching

In this section, we introduce preliminaries of flow matching. Conditional flow matching (CFM) is a variant of continuous normalizing flows , which is a class of generative models for modeling an unknown data distribution $`q(x)`$, where $`x`$ denotes the data point in the distribution. The CFM method aims to predict a time-dependent flow field that represents the velocity $`u_t = \frac{dx_t}{dt}`$ of the data point $`x_t`$ at a continuous timestep $`t`$, where the data point $`x_0\sim p(x)`$ starts from a simple prior distribution $`p(x)`$ (e.g., Gaussian distribution) at the timestep $`t=0`$, and is pushed towards the target distribution $`q(x)`$ by the velocity field as the timesteps finally approach $`t=1`$. This process can be formulated as an ordinary differential equation (ODE) as follows:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\label{eq:flow_matching_ode}
	\frac{dx_t}{dt} = u_t \approx v_t(x_t, \theta), s.t.  x_0\sim p(x), t\in [0,1],
\end{equation}
```
where $`u_t`$ is the ground truth velocity for $`x_t`$ and is expected to be approximated by the CFM model. $`v_t`$ is the predicted velocity by the CFM model with the parameter $`\theta`$. Once the $`u_t`$ is obtained, we can train the model with a simple flow-matching objective:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathcal{L}_\text{CFM} = \mathbb{E}_{t}||u_t - v_t(x_t;\theta)||_2^2.
\end{equation}
```
Once the training is done, we can obtain $`v_t(x_t;\theta) \approx \frac{dx_t}{dt}`$, and solve the ODE in Eq. <a href="#eq:flow_matching_ode" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:flow_matching_ode">[eq:flow_matching_ode]</a> to obtain the predicted sample $`x_1`$.

Now, we consider the specific formulation of the ground truth velocity $`u_t`$. We adopt the optimal transportation (OT) path proposed in to obtain the ground truth velocity. Specifically, given the target data point $`x_1`$ and the current data point $`x_t`$, the most efficient way is to go with a straight line, i.e., $`u_t = (x_1-x_t)/(1-t)`$, where $`(1-t)`$ is a normalization term to make the ground truth velocity a unit vector. We choose the OT path for its simplicity and prior evidence that it outperforms other alternatives (such as diffusion paths ).

# Experiment Details

In the following sections, we illustrate the model configuration and training details of our MimicTalk.

## Model Configuration

We provide detailed hyper-parameter settings about the model configuration in Table <a href="#tab:model_configs" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:model_configs">[tab:model_configs]</a>.

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th colspan="2" style="text-align: center;">Hyper-parameter</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Value</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td rowspan="2" style="text-align: center;">SD-Hybrid Adaptation</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">LoRA rank</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Learnable Tri-plane shape</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">256 × 256 × 32 × 3</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="9" style="text-align: center;">ICS-A2M Model</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Transformer - Attention Hidden Size</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1024</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Transformer - Norm Type</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">LayerNorm</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Transformer - Attention Layers</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">16</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Transformer - MLP Layers per Block</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Transformer - Attention Head Hidden Size</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">64</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Transformer - Attention Heads</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Flow Matching - Final sigma</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Flow Matching - ODE method</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">midpoint</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Flow Matching - ODE infer steps</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="tab:model_configs" label="tab:model_configs"></span>

</div>

## Training Details

We use the pre-trained one-shot person-agnostic renderer provided in the official implementation[^6] of .

For the SD-Hybrid adaptation, we trained the model on 1 Nvidia A100 GPU, with a batch size of 1, requiring about 8 GB of GPU memory. Surprisingly, our method achieved better results than existing person-specific baselines in just 2,000 iterations, which took about 0.26 hours and was 47 times faster than RAD-NeRF.

Regarding the ICS-A2M model, we trained it on 4 Nvidia A100 GPUs, with a batch size of 20,000 mel frames per GPU. The flow-matching-based ICS-A2M model was trained for 500,000 iterations, taking 80 hours.

## Detailed User Study Setting

As for mean score opinion (MOS) test in Table <a href="#tab:user_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:user_study">[tab:user_study]</a>, we select 5 audio clips and 10 trained identities (as used in by and ) to construct 50 talking portrait video samples for each method. Each video has been rated by 20 participants. We perform the identity similarity, visual quality, and lip-synchronization MOS evaluations. For MOS, each tester is asked to evaluate the subjective score of a video on a 1-5 Likert scale. For identity similarity, we tell the participants to *"only focus on the similarity between the identity in the source image and the video"*; for visual quality, we tell the participants to *"focus on the overall visual quality, including the image fidelity and smooth transition between adjacent frames"*; as for lip synchronization, we tell the participants to *"only focus on the semantic-level audio-lip synchronization, and ignores the visual quality"*.

As for comparative mean score (CMOS) test in Table <a href="#tab:cmos_style" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:cmos_style">[tab:cmos_style]</a>, we first trained 10 person-specific renderers on 10 identities’ ten-second-long videos. We randomly select 5 out-of-domain audio clips for driving each renderer. So there are 50 result videos for each setting. We include 20 participants in the user study. Each tester is asked to evaluate the subjective score of two paired videos on a -3 +3 Likert scale(e.g., the first video is constantly 0.0, and the second video is +3 means the tester strongly prefers the second video). To examine the aspect of (lip-sync, pose-sync, expressiveness), we tell the participants to *"only focus on the (lip-sync, pose-sync, expressiveness), and ignore the other two factors."*.

# Limitations and Future Work

In this section, we discuss the limitations of the proposed method and how we plan to handle them in future work. Firstly, in this paper, our main focus is on the face segment. By contrast, the rigid modeling of the hair and torso segment are relatively naive and occasionally produce artifacts. We plan to adopt conditional video diffusion models like to enhance the naturalness of the hair and torso segments. Secondly, we can consider more conditions, such as eyeball movement and hand gestures. Finally, the inference speed (15 FPS on 1 A100) can be improved by introducing more efficient network structures like Gaussian Splatting.

# Broader Impacts

In this section, we discuss the ethical impacts that might be brought by the rapidly developing talking face generation technology and our measures to address these concerns.

MimicTalk facilitates efficient and expressive personalized talking face synthesis. With the development of talking face generation techniques, it is much easier to synthesize talking human portrait videos. Under appropriate usage, this technique could facilitate real-world applications like virtual idols and customer service, improving the user experience and making human life more convenient. However, the talking face generation method can be misused in deepfake-related usages, raising ethical concerns. We are highly motivated to handle these misusage problems. To this end, we plan to include several restrictions in the license of MimicTalk. Specifically,

- We will add visible watermarks to the video synthesized by MimicTalk so that the public can easily tell the fakeness of the synthesized video.

- The synthesized videos should only be used in educational or other legal usages (like online courses), and any abuse will take responsibility by tracking the method we come up with in the next point.

- We will also inject an invisible watermark into the synthesized video to store the information of the video maker so that the video maker has to account for the potential risk raised by the synthesized video.

# NeurIPS Paper Checklist

The checklist is designed to encourage best practices for responsible machine learning research, addressing issues of reproducibility, transparency, research ethics, and societal impact. Do not remove the checklist: **The papers not including the checklist will be desk rejected.** The checklist should follow the references and follow the (optional) supplemental material. The checklist does NOT count towards the page limit.

Please read the checklist guidelines carefully for information on how to answer these questions. For each question in the checklist:

- You should answer , , or .

- means either that the question is Not Applicable for that particular paper or the relevant information is Not Available.

- Please provide a short (1–2 sentence) justification right after your answer (even for NA).

**The checklist answers are an integral part of your paper submission.** They are visible to the reviewers, area chairs, senior area chairs, and ethics reviewers. You will be asked to also include it (after eventual revisions) with the final version of your paper, and its final version will be published with the paper.

The reviewers of your paper will be asked to use the checklist as one of the factors in their evaluation. While "" is generally preferable to "", it is perfectly acceptable to answer "" provided a proper justification is given (e.g., "error bars are not reported because it would be too computationally expensive" or "we were unable to find the license for the dataset we used"). In general, answering "" or "" is not grounds for rejection. While the questions are phrased in a binary way, we acknowledge that the true answer is often more nuanced, so please just use your best judgment and write a justification to elaborate. All supporting evidence can appear either in the main paper or the supplemental material, provided in appendix. If you answer to a question, in the justification please point to the section(s) where related material for the question can be found.

IMPORTANT, please:

- **Delete this instruction block, but keep the section heading “NeurIPS paper checklist"**,

- **Keep the checklist subsection headings, questions/answers and guidelines below.**

- **Do not modify the questions and only use the provided macros for your answers**.

1.  **Claims**

2.  Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the paper’s contributions and scope?

3.  Answer:

4.  Justification: Our contributions include: (1) first propose to exploit generic model for personalized 3D talking face generation; (2) a SD-hybrid adaptation pipleine for fast and effective identity adaptation; (3) a ICS-A2M model for expressive motion generation.

5.  Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims made in the paper.

    - The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A No or NA answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.

    - The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.

    - It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals are not attained by the paper.

6.  **Limitations**

7.  Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?

8.  Answer:

9.  Justification: See <a href="#app:limit" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="app:limit">10</a>.

10. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper has no limitation while the answer No means that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.

    - The authors are encouraged to create a separate "Limitations" section in their paper.

    - The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings, model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the implications would be.

    - The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.

    - The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach. For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle technical jargon.

    - The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms and how they scale with dataset size.

    - If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to address problems of privacy and fairness.

    - While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an important role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.

11. **Theory Assumptions and Proofs**

12. Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and a complete (and correct) proof?

13. Answer:

14. Justification: This paper is a application paper. No theoretical assumption is made.

15. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not include theoretical results.

    - All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-referenced.

    - All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.

    - The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short proof sketch to provide intuition.

    - Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.

    - Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.

16. **Experimental Result Reproducibility**

17. Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main experimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?

18. Answer:

19. Justification: We have provided model details and training details to improve reproducibility. We will also release the code after the review phase.

20. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

    - If the paper includes experiments, a No answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not.

    - If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken to make their results reproducible or verifiable.

    - Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways. For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are appropriate to the research performed.

    - While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submissions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the nature of the contribution. For example

      1.  If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how to reproduce that algorithm.

      2.  If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe the architecture clearly and fully.

      3.  If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct the dataset).

      4.  We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility. In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.

21. **Open access to data and code**

22. Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instructions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental material?

23. Answer:

24. Justification: We have provided model details and training details to improve reproducibility. We will also release the code after the review phase.

25. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.

    - Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (<https://nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy>) for more details.

    - While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not be possible, so “No” is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source benchmark).

    - The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (<https://nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy>) for more details.

    - The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.

    - The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.

    - At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized versions (if applicable).

    - Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.

26. **Experimental Setting/Details**

27. Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperparameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer, etc.) necessary to understand the results?

28. Answer:

29. Justification: We have provided details experimental setting and details in the paper and appendix.

30. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

    - The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.

    - The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental material.

31. **Experiment Statistical Significance**

32. Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate information about the statistical significance of the experiments?

33. Answer:

34. Justification: We use 95% confidence in user study.

35. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

    - The authors should answer "Yes" if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the main claims of the paper.

    - The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall run with given experimental conditions).

    - The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula, call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)

    - The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).

    - It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error of the mean.

    - It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis of Normality of errors is not verified.

    - For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g. negative error rates).

    - If error bars are reported in tables or plots, The authors should explain in the text how they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.

36. **Experiments Compute Resources**

37. Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the computer resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce the experiments?

38. Answer:

39. Justification: We have introduced the compute resources used during the experiments.

40. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not include experiments.

    - The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster, or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.

    - The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.

    - The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that didn’t make it into the paper).

41. **Code Of Ethics**

42. Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the NeurIPS Code of Ethics <https://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines>?

43. Answer:

44. Justification: The research conform to the NeurIPS code of Ethics,

45. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics.

    - If the authors answer No, they should explain the special circumstances that require a deviation from the Code of Ethics.

    - The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consideration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).

46. **Broader Impacts**

47. Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative societal impacts of the work performed?

48. Answer:

49. Justification: Please see <a href="#app:ethic" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="app:ethic">11</a>.

50. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.

    - If the authors answer NA or No, they should explain why their work has no societal impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.

    - Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses (e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations (e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.

    - The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to generate deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train models that generate Deepfakes faster.

    - The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.

    - If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks, mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).

51. **Safeguards**

52. Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pretrained language models, image generators, or scraped datasets)?

53. Answer:

54. Justification: Please see <a href="#app:ethic" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="app:ethic">11</a>.

55. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper poses no such risks.

    - Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing safety filters.

    - Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.

    - We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best faith effort.

56. **Licenses for existing assets**

57. Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and properly respected?

58. Answer:

59. Justification: The research conform to the licenses for existing assets.

60. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not use existing assets.

    - The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.

    - The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a URL.

    - The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.

    - For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of service of that source should be provided.

    - If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the package should be provided. For popular datasets, <a href="paperswithcode.com/datasets" class="uri">paperswithcode.com/datasets</a> has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the license of a dataset.

    - For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.

    - If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to the asset’s creators.

61. **New Assets**

62. Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation provided alongside the assets?

63. Answer:

64. Justification: We will well documented the source code that will be released after the review.

65. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not release new assets.

    - Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license, limitations, etc.

    - The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose asset is used.

    - At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.

66. **Crowdsourcing and Research with Human Subjects**

67. Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as well as details about compensation (if any)?

68. Answer:

69. Justification: See <a href="#app:user_study_setting" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="app:user_study_setting">9.3</a>.

70. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.

    - Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribution of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be included in the main paper.

    - According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation, or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data collector.

71. **Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approvals or Equivalent for Research with Human Subjects**

72. Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB) approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or institution) were obtained?

73. Answer:

74. Justification: There is no risks in mean opinion score test.

75. Guidelines:

    - The answer NA means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research with human subjects.

    - Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent) may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you should clearly state this in the paper.

    - We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the guidelines for their institution.

    - For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.

[^1]: Equal contribution.

[^2]: Interns at ByteDance.

[^3]: Corresponding author.

[^4]: <https://github.com/yerfor/Real3DPortrait>

[^5]: We release the source code at <https://mimictalk.github.io>.

[^6]: <https://github.com/yerfor/Real3DPortrait/>

## References

1. Hadar Averbuch-Elor, Daniel Cohen-Or, Johannes Kopf, and Michael~F Cohen. 2017.
\newblock Bringing portraits to life.
\newblock \emph{ACM transactions on graphics (TOG)}.
2. Jonathan~T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter Hedman, Ricardo
  Martin-Brualla, and Pratul~P Srinivasan. 2021.
\newblock Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neural
  radiance fields.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, pages 5855--5864.
3. Qiong Cao, Li~Shen, Weidi Xie, Omkar~M Parkhi, and Andrew Zisserman. 2018.
\newblock Vggface2: A dataset for recognising faces across pose and age.
\newblock In \emph{2018 13th IEEE international conference on automatic face \&
  gesture recognition (FG 2018)}, pages 67--74. IEEE.
4. Eric~R. Chan, Connor~Z. Lin, Matthew~A. Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan,
  Shalini~De Mello, Orazio Gallo, Leonidas Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh
  Khamis, Tero Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein. 2022.
\newblock Efficient geometry-aware {3D} generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}.
5. Lele Chen, Guofeng Cui, Ziyi Kou, Haitian Zheng, and Chenliang Xu. 2020.
\newblock What comprises a good talking-head video generation?: A survey and
  benchmark.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03201}. [arXiv:2005.03201](../2020/2005.03201.md)
6. Ricky~TQ Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and David~K Duvenaud. 2018.
\newblock Neural ordinary differential equations.
7. Xuangeng Chu, Yu~Li, Ailing Zeng, Tianyu Yang, Lijian Lin, Yunfei Liu, and
  Tatsuya Harada. 2024.
\newblock Gpavatar: Generalizable and precise head avatar from image(s).
8. Joon~Son Chung, Amir Jamaludin, and Andrew Zisserman. 2017.
\newblock You said that?
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02966}. [arXiv:1705.02966](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02966)
9. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman. 2018.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
10. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman. 2017.
\newblock Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild.
\newblock In \emph{ACCV 2016 International Workshops}, pages 251--263.
  Springer.
11. Yu~Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong. 2019.
\newblock Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From
  single image to image set.
\newblock In \emph{IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops}.
12. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
  2021.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}.
13. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020.
\newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
14. Fa-Ting Hong and Dan Xu. 2023.
\newblock Implicit identity representation conditioned memory compensation
  network for talking head video generation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 23062--23072.
15. Fa-Ting Hong, Longhao Zhang, Li~Shen, and Dan Xu. 2022.
\newblock Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head video
  generation.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}.
16. Edward~J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean
  Wang, Lu~Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021.
\newblock Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09685}. [arXiv:2106.09685](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09685)
17. Li~Hu, Xin Gao, Peng Zhang, Ke~Sun, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. 2023.
\newblock Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis
  for character animation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17117}. [arXiv:2311.17117](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.17117)
18. Xun Huang and Serge Belongie. 2017.
\newblock Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance
  normalization.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, pages 1501--1510.
19. Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei~A Efros. 2017.
\newblock Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}.
20. Jianwen Jiang, Chao Liang, Jiaqi Yang, Gaojie Lin, Tianyun Zhong, and Yanbo
  Zheng. 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
\newblock Loopy: Taming audio-driven portrait avatar with long-term motion
  dependency.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02634}. [arXiv:2409.02634](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02634)
21. Jianwen Jiang, Gaojie Lin, Zhengkun Rong, Chao Liang, Yongming Zhu, Jiaqi Yang,
  and Tianyun Zhong. 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
\newblock Mobileportrait: Real-time one-shot neural head avatars on mobile
  devices.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05712}. [arXiv:2407.05712](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.05712)
22. Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk{\"u}hler, and George Drettakis.
  2023.
\newblock 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 42(4):1--14.
23. Matthew Le, Apoorv Vyas, Bowen Shi, Brian Karrer, Leda Sari, Rashel Moritz,
  Mary Williamson, Vimal Manohar, Yossi Adi, Jay Mahadeokar, et~al. 2023.
\newblock Voicebox: Text-guided multilingual universal speech generation at
  scale.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.15687}. [arXiv:2306.15687](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15687)
24. Jiahe Li, Jiawei Zhang, Xiao Bai, Jun Zhou, and Lin Gu. 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
\newblock Efficient region-aware neural radiance fields for high-fidelity
  talking portrait synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}.
25. Weichuang Li, Longhao Zhang, Dong Wang, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Mulin Chen,
  Bang Zhang, Zhongjian Wang, Liefeng Bo, and Xuelong Li. 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
\newblock One-shot high-fidelity talking-head synthesis with deformable neural
  radiance field.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}.
26. Xueting Li, Shalini De~Mello, Sifei Liu, Koki Nagano, Umar Iqbal, and Jan
  Kautz. 2023{\natexlab{c}}.
\newblock Generalizable one-shot neural head avatar.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.08768}. [arXiv:2306.08768](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.08768)
27. Xueting Li, Shalini De~Mello, Sifei Liu, Koki Nagano, Umar Iqbal, and Jan
  Kautz. 2024.
\newblock Generalizable one-shot 3d neural head avatar.
\newblock \emph{NeurIPS}, 36.
28. Chao Liang, Jianwen Jiang, Tianyun Zhong, Gaojie Lin, Zhengkun Rong, Jiaqi
  Yang, and Yongming Zhu. 2024.
\newblock Superior and pragmatic talking face generation with teacher-student
  framework.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17883}. [arXiv:2403.17883](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.17883)
29. Yaron Lipman, Ricky~TQ Chen, Heli Ben-Hamu, Maximilian Nickel, and Matt Le.
  2023.
\newblock Flow matching for generative modeling.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}.
30. Yiheng Liu, Tianle Han, Siyuan Ma, Jiayue Zhang, Yuanyuan Yang, Jiaming Tian,
  Hao He, Antong Li, Mengshen He, Zhengliang Liu, et~al. 2023.
\newblock Summary of chatgpt-related research and perspective towards the
  future of large language models.
\newblock \emph{Meta-Radiology}, page 100017.
31. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao. 2021{\natexlab{a}}.
\newblock Live speech portraits: Real-time photoistic talking-head animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics}.
32. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao. 2021{\natexlab{b}}.
\newblock Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-head
  animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 40(6):1--17.
33. Yifeng Ma, Suzhen Wang, Zhipeng Hu, Changjie Fan, Tangjie Lv, Yu~Ding, Zhidong
  Deng, and Xin Yu. 2023.
\newblock Styletalk: One-shot talking head generation with controllable
  speaking styles.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence}, volume~37, pages 1896--1904.
34. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T Barron, Ravi
  Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2021.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
  synthesis.
\newblock \emph{Communications of the ACM}, 65(1):99--106.
35. P.~Paysan, R.~Knothe, B.~Amberg, S.~Romdhani, and T.~Vetter. 2009.
\newblock A 3d face model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition.
\newblock \emph{Proceedings of the 6th IEEE International Conference on
  Advanced Video and Signal based Surveillance (AVSS) for Security, Safety and
  Monitoring in Smart Environments}.
36. KR~Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV~Jawahar. 2020.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In \emph{ACM MM}.
37. Yurui Ren, Ge~Li, Yuanqi Chen, Thomas~H Li, and Shan Liu. 2021.
\newblock Pirenderer: Controllable portrait image generation via semantic
  neural rendering.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}.
38. Daniel Roich, Ron Mokady, Amit~H Bermano, and Daniel Cohen-Or. 2021.
\newblock Pivotal tuning for latent-based editing of real images.
\newblock \emph{ACM Trans. Graph.}
39. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn
  Ommer. 2021.
\newblock \href {http://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752} {High-resolution image
  synthesis with latent diffusion models}.
40. Aliaksandr Siarohin, St{\'e}phane Lathuili{\`e}re, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa
  Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. 2019.
\newblock First order motion model for image animation.
41. Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2014.
\newblock Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556}. [arXiv:1409.1556](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556)
42. Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik~P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano
  Ermon, and Ben Poole. 2021.
\newblock Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential
  equations.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}.
43. Jingxiang Sun, Xuan Wang, Lizhen Wang, Xiaoyu Li, Yong Zhang, Hongwen Zhang,
  and Yebin Liu. 2023.
\newblock Next3d: Generative neural texture rasterization for 3d-aware head
  avatars.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 20991--21002.
44. Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven~M Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. 2017.
\newblock Synthesizing obama: learning lip sync from audio.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 36(4):1--13.
45. Shuai Tan, Bin Ji, and Ye~Pan. 2023.
\newblock Emmn: Emotional motion memory network for audio-driven emotional
  talking face generation.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, pages 22146--22156.
46. Jiaxiang Tang, Kaisiyuan Wang, Hang Zh\textbf{ou}, Xiaokang Chen, Dongliang He,
  Tianshu Hu, Jingtuo Liu, Gang Zeng, and Jingdong Wang. 2022.
\newblock Real-time neural radiance talking portrait synthesis via
  audio-spatial decomposition.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12368}. [arXiv:2211.12368](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12368)
47. Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner. 2020{\natexlab{a}}.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock In \emph{Computer Vision--ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23--28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVI 16}, pages 716--731.
  Springer.
48. Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner. 2020{\natexlab{b}}.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV 2020}.
49. Linrui Tian, Qi~Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo. 2024.
\newblock Emo: Emote portrait alive-generating expressive portrait videos with
  audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17485}. [arXiv:2402.17485](./2402.17485.md)
50. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu. 2021.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video
  conferencing.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}.
51. Yaohui Wang, Di~Yang, Francois Bremond, and Antitza Dantcheva. 2022.
\newblock Latent image animator: Learning to animate images via latent space
  navigation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.09043}. [arXiv:2203.09043](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.09043)
52. Haozhe Wu, Jia Jia, Haoyu Wang, Yishun Dou, Chao Duan, and Qingshan Deng. 2021.
\newblock Imitating arbitrary talking style for realistic audio-driven talking
  face synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ACM MM}.
53. Enze Xie, Wenhai Wang, Zhiding Yu, Anima Anandkumar, Jose~M Alvarez, and Ping
  Luo. 2021.
\newblock Segformer: Simple and efficient design for semantic segmentation with
  transformers.
\newblock In \emph{NIPS}.
54. Sicheng Xu, Guojun Chen, Yu-Xiao Guo, Jiaolong Yang, Chong Li, Zhenyu Zang,
  Yizhong Zhang, Xin Tong, and Baining Guo. 2024.
\newblock Vasa-1: Lifelike audio-driven talking faces generated in real time.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10667}. [arXiv:2404.10667](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10667)
55. Yuelang Xu, Benwang Chen, Zhe Li, Hongwen Zhang, Lizhen Wang, Zerong Zheng, and
  Yebin Liu. 2023.
\newblock Gaussian head avatar: Ultra high-fidelity head avatar via dynamic
  gaussians.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.03029}. [arXiv:2312.03029](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03029)
56. Shunyu Yao, RuiZhe Zhong, Yichao Yan, Guangtao Zhai, and Xiaokang Yang. 2022.
\newblock Dfa-nerf: Personalized talking head generation via disentangled face
  attributes neural rendering.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00791}. [arXiv:2201.00791](../2022/2201.00791.md)
57. Zhenhui Ye, Ziyue Jiang, Yi~Ren, Jinglin Liu, JinZheng He, and Zhou Zhao. 2023.
\newblock Geneface: Generalized and high-fidelity audio-driven 3d talking face
  synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}.
58. Zhenhui Ye, Tianyun Zhong, Yi~Ren, Jiaqi Yang, Weichuang Li, Jiangwei Huang,
  Ziyue Jiang, Jinzheng He, Rongjie Huang, Jinglin Liu, Chen Zhang, Xiang Yin,
  Zejun Ma, and Zhou Zhao. 2024.
\newblock Real3d-portrait: One-shot realistic 3d talking portrait synthesis.
59. Zipeng Ye, Mengfei Xia, Ran Yi, Juyong Zhang, Yu-Kun Lai, Xuwei Huang, Guoxin
  Zhang, and Yong-jin Liu. 2022.
\newblock Audio-driven talking face video generation with dynamic convolution
  kernels.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}.
60. Ran Yi, Zipeng Ye, Juyong Zhang, Hujun Bao, and Yong-Jin Liu. 2020.
\newblock Audio-driven talking face video generation with learning-based
  personalized head pose.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10137}. [arXiv:2002.10137](../2020/2002.10137.md)
61. Bohan Zeng, Boyu Liu, Hong Li, Xuhui Liu, Jianzhuang Liu, Dapeng Chen, Wei
  Peng, and Baochang Zhang. 2022.
\newblock Fnevr: Neural volume rendering for face animation.
\newblock In \emph{NIPS}.
62. Wenxuan Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Xuan Wang, Yong Zhang, Xi~Shen, Yu~Guo, Ying Shan,
  and Fei Wang. 2023.
\newblock Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized
  audio-driven single image talking face animation.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}.
63. Jian Zhao and Hui Zhang. 2022.
\newblock Thin-plate spline motion model for image animation.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}.
64. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis,
  and Dingzeyu Li. 2020.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG)}, 39(6):1--15.
