---
arxiv_id: '2410.10122'
title: 'MuseTalk: Real-Time High-Fidelity Video Dubbing via Spatio-Temporal Sampling'
authors:
- Yue Zhang
- Zhizhou Zhong
- Minhao Liu
- Zhaokang Chen
- Bin Wu
- Yubin Zeng
- Chao Zhan
- Yingjie He
- Junxin Huang
- Wenjiang Zhou
submitted: '2024-10-14'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10122
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 10/57
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:17:30+00:00'
references_parsed: 57
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

<figure id="fig:fig_1" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="image/fig_1.pdf" />
<figcaption>The difference between the talking head generation and the video dubbing. Zoom in to see the differences in the lip area. MuseTalk can efficiently generate video frames in one step for video dubbing task. </figcaption>
</figure>

Virtual human generation  is an important research field in computer vision. One significant application is generating lip movements that match the pronunciation of the target language for multilingual films or animations .It removes the mismatch between lip movements and speech in traditional dubbing, enhancing audience immersion without reshooting actors.

Recently, Image-to-Video (I2V) talking face generation methods  have shown significant potential in creating virtual actors by generating highly realistic avatars for specific identities. One-shot talking face generation methods based on diffusion models , such as EMO , EchoMimic , and LOOPY , have gained popularity. These methods allow users to create a video with good audio-visual consistency by uploading just a single image and an audio clip. However, their reliance on iterative denoising processes restricts their suitability for real-time applications. In the generated videos, the model autonomously adjusts characters’ head and eye movements based on the audio, as illustrated in <a href="#fig:fig_1" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_1">1</a>.

In this paper, we investigate one-shot video-dubbing, a Video-to-Video (V2V) technique that focuses on preserving the original actor’s head and eye movements while selectively modifying only the lip movements, without requiring additional model retraining. Existing one-shot video-dubbing methods can be broadly categorized into two main paradigms: diffusion-based approaches and GAN-based techniques . While diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable capabilities for video-dubbing tasks, their reliance on extensive training data and multi-step inference processes makes them computationally expensive and impractical for local deployment by media professionals and AI artists.

Existing GAN-based methods  often fall short in video quality, frequently producing blurry or distorted regions that negatively impact visual fidelity. Additionally, these methods often fail to preserve the original actor’s identity accurately, leading to noticeable changes in facial appearance during the dubbing process. Such issues significantly limit their practical applications. Despite well-known training instabilities in GANs , their ability to generate outputs in a single step provides a promising solution to real-time application. Driven by the computational efficiency and cost-effectiveness of GANs, we investigate novel one-shot lip-sync generation methods that achieve high-quality results while maintaining efficiency.

This paper introduces MuseTalk, a GAN-based real-time one-shot video-dubbing framework. Specifically, to reduce user costs, we design a one-step face generator in the VAE  latent space. MuseTalk addresses key training challenges in GAN-based video-dubbing through a carefully designed two-stage training process. A novel spatio-temporal sampling strategy is proposed to improve identity consistency and lip movement accuracy. We first implement mild pretraining using latent space inpainting to enhance the model’s ability for facial abstract prediction. During this stage, we introduce Informative Frame Sampling to select key frames. Subsequently, we incorporate audio-visual synchornize loss and GAN loss, with the latter focusing on optimizing the mouth region. Here, Dynamic Margin Sampling is employed to spatially select critical facial regions that promote better lip movement learning.

In summary, our contributions are three-fold: (i) We propose MuseTalk, a GAN-based video-dubbing framework based on latent space inpainting, which enables real-time generation of high-fidelity lip-synced videos; (ii) We introduce a comprehensive two-stage training framework that resolves the conflict between GAN loss and audio-visual synchornize loss, achieving a balance between lip movement accuracy and teeth clarity; (iii) We propose a novel spatio-temporal sampling strategy. Specifically, we design Informative Frame Sampling at the frame level to bridge the gap between training and inference, and Dynamic Margin Sampling at the region level to promote lip movement learning in adversarial training. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the efficacy of MuseTalk, even compared to diffusion-based methods.

# Related Work

## Talking Head Generation

In recent years, audio-driven talking head generation methods have attracted significant attention and provide valuable insight for video dubbing techniques. Talking head generation can be categorized into NeRF-based , GAN-based , and diffusion-based  approaches.

NeRF-based methods require identity-specific videos for training and additional rendering  time, with early methods like AD-NeRF  taking several seconds per frame. Despite the real-time rendering achieved by integrating Instant-NGP , retraining is needed for new identities. Diffusion-based methods, such as EMO Portrait , employ a two-stage training process by integrating ReferenceNet , temporal layers , and audio attention layers into Stable Diffusion models . Similar strategies are used in LOOPY , Hallo , and EchoMimic . These methods allow for one-shot vivid talking head generation from images, but are computationally expensive.

In contrast, GAN-based methods generate images in one step. Early methods  fail to maintain identity consistency and accurate lip movement. To address this, methods like MakeItTalk  and SadTalker  adopt multistage inference, separating audio-to-motion and motion-to-video modeling. Although this improves the results, it increases the computational overhead and complexity.

<figure id="fig:fig_pipeline" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="image/fig_stage1.pdf" />
<figcaption> Illustration of MuseTalk’s framework. We first encode a reference facial image and an occluded lower half target image into perceptually equivalent latent space. Subsequently, we employ a multimodal U-Net to effectively fuse audio and visual features at various scales. Consequently, the decoded results from the latent space yield more realistic and lip-synced talking face visual content.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Video Dubbing

Video dubbing focuses on replacing the mouth region of a source face based on driving audio. The most common approach  involves using a mask in the lower half of the face or the lip region to guide the model to create new visual effects only in these areas, as shown in <a href="#fig:fig_pipeline" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_pipeline">2</a>. Early methods  predominantly relied on GANs. Although these methods achieved lip movements that were relatively consistent with the audio content, they often struggled with maintaining identity consistency and reconstructing clear teeth details. DI-Net  attempted to train models on high-resolution data, which compromised lip accuracy. StyleSync  highlighted this dilemma, noting that forcing the model to restore too many lip-relevant details might interfere with learning.

Recently, methods such as LatentSync  and DiffTalk  have leveraged the strong detail generation capabilities of the Latent Diffusion paradigm  for video dubbing tasks. LatentSync integrates the SyncNet loss  to enhance lip motion-audio alignment during the one-step denoising process. Despite improvements in audio-visual synchornize and clarity, these methods suffer from the heavy inference burden.

# Method

## Overview

We propose MuseTalk, a GAN-based one-step generation framework operating in the VAE latent space, building on insights from prior work. This section outlines the technical implementation and design principles of MuseTalk.

Through experimentation, we found that simultaneously optimizing the SyncNet loss  and GAN loss in a single training stage for a randomly initialized model leads to training instability. We further discuss this issue in the supplementary materials. In contrast, MuseTalk introduces a novel two-stage training strategy to mitigate this problem.

The first stage, **Facial Abstraction Pretraining**, establishes foundational visual representations using our proposed **Informative Frame Sampling (IFS)** mechanism. In the second stage, **Lip-Sync Adversarial Finetuning**, we introduce **Dynamic Margin Sampling (DMS)** to balance adversarial training objectives with lip-synchronization constraints, enabling effective optimization of both aspects.

## Network Pipelines

MuseTalk is designed to seamlessly integrate audio and visual information while maintaining efficient one-step inference capabilities. Unlike conventional GAN-based methods , which use independent encoders for audio and visual data, we leverage a multimodal U-Net architecture  as the backbone of the generator. To further enhance computational efficiency, we refer to the Latent Diffusion approach , shifting the learning task from the pixel domain to the latent space.

**Identity Feature Handling.** For video dubbing, the generated video must retain the identity of the original reference image, which necessitates integrating identity information into the network. Previous diffusion-based methods  achieve this by incorporating a ReferenceNet that adjusts each attention layer to inject identity information. While this approach is effective for multi-step denoising processes, it can be overly computationally expensive for one-step predictions. Instead, we simplify the process by concatenating identity information along the channel dimension at the U-Net input.

Specifically, we pass the upper half of the source image at time $`t`$ and the full-face reference image (captured at a different moment) through a VAE encoder. The encoded features are then concatenated along the channel dimension to form a comprehensive image feature representation $`v^{w \times h \times 2c}`$, where $`w`$ and $`h`$ denote the width and height of the feature, respectively. As illustrated in <a href="#fig:fig_pipeline" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_pipeline">2</a>, an occluded lower half of the ground truth image $`I_{s}^{t}`$ and a reference identity image $`I_{\text{ref}}^{t}`$ at time $`t`$ are each passed through the VAE encoder, producing outpus $`v_{\text{ref}}^{w \times h \times c}`$ and $`v_{m}^{w \times h \times c}`$. Experimental results in <a href="#tab:performance" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:performance">[tab:performance]</a> demonstrate that this straightforward yet effective design provides robust identity control.

During inference, only a single input frame at time $`t`$ is required. This frame is used as both $`I_{\text{ref}}^{t}`$ and $`I_{s}^{t}`$. The generated $`I_{o}^{t}`$ is subsequently overlaid onto the original image using advanced face parsing and blending techniques. Detailed descriptions are provided in the supplementary materials. The construction of reference and source images during training is elaborated upon in subsequent sections.

<figure id="fig:fig_IFS" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="image/fig_sis.pdf" />
<figcaption> The illustration of proposed Informative Frame Sampling mechanism. We calculate the pose and lip similarity based on Euclidean distance between facial landmarks. </figcaption>
</figure>

**Audio Feature Handling.** Following established practices , we utilize a pre-trained audio encoder  to extract audio features and inject them into the U-Net through its cross-attention layers. To optimize inference speed, we employ the lightweight Whisper-Tiny model  to process an audio segment centered at time $`t`$ with duration $`T`$. The selected audio segment is first resampled to 16,000 Hz and converted into an 80-channel log-magnitude Mel spectrogram, denoted as $`A_{mel}^{t} \in \mathbb{R}^{T \times 80}`$. The resulting audio feature has dimensions $`a^{T \times d}`$, where $`d=384`$.

## Facial Abstract Pretraining

**Observation.** We observed that joint optimization of multiple losses during early training stages leads to unstable convergence, particularly when combined with adversarial objectives. To address this challenge, we adopt a phased training approach where the first stage focuses on cultivating facial abstract inpainting capabilities through mild optimization strategies.

**Loss Function.** At this stage, we employ stable reconstruction losses instead of adversarial training objectives. To focus the model’s attention as much as possible on the facial region, we crop the images along the edges of the face, thereby reducing the interference from background inpainting tasks on the model, as illustrated in <a href="#fig:fig_DMS" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_DMS">5</a>. Given a synthesized talking face image $`I^{t}_{o}`$ and its ground truth counterpart $`I^{t}_{gt}`$, we formulate the optimization target as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L_{\text{stage1}}} = \left \| I^{t}_{o} - I^{t}_{gt} \right \|_1 + \lambda_{vgg} \left \| \mathcal{V}(I^{t}_{o}) - \mathcal{V}(I^{t}_{gt}) \right \|_2,
\label{loss:stage1}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathcal{V}`$ denotes the feature extractor of VGG19 . Utilizing solely the L1 loss tends to produce overly smoothed facial reconstructions. In contrast, perceptual loss  facilitates the learning of high-frequency visual patterns, particularly in capturing transitional facial features such as sideburn textures and incipient dental structures.

**Informative Frame Sampling.** Previous GAN-based approaches  rely on random sampling to obtain the reference image $`I^{t}_{ref}`$. However, this method introduces a significant gap between training and inference phases. Specifically, during training, the reference image $`I^{t}_{\text{ref}}`$ and the ground truth image $`I^{t}_{\text{gt}}`$ often exhibit different head poses. In contrast, during inference, $`I^{t}_{\text{ref}}`$ and $`I^{t}_{\text{gt}}`$ share the same pose. This discrepancy makes it challenging for models to generalize well across different scenarios. We introduce a novel Informative Frame Sampling (IFS) strategy to address the training-inference discrepancy by focusing the model on lip movement generation. The IFS strategy aims to construct data pairs $`I^{t}_{ref}`$ and $`I^{t}_{gt}`$ that retain relevant texture details while filtering out redundant or distracting information. As illustrated in <a href="#fig:fig_IFS" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_IFS">3</a>, the process involves three key steps:

1.  **Pose Alignment:** We calculate head pose similarity using chin landmark distances and select the most similar frames to form the Pose-Aligned Set $`\mathcal{E}_{\text{pose}}`$.

2.  **Distinct Lip Movement:** We compute inner-lip landmark differences to identify frames with distinct lip movements, forming the Lip Motion Dissimilarity Set $`\mathcal{E}_{\text{mouth}}`$.

3.  **Intersection Selection:** We choose the intersection $`\mathcal{E}_{\text{pose}} \cap \mathcal{E}_{\text{mouth}}`$ as the Sampled Reference Image Set $`\mathcal{E}`$, sort it by similarity, and select the top $`k`$ subset as $`I^{t}_{\text{ref}}`$. We later describe the optimal value of $`k`$ in <a href="#ablation-IFS" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="ablation-IFS">2</a>.

## Lip-Sync Adversarial Finetuning

**Optimization Objective.** The primary goal of this stage is to enhance the model’s capability in generating realistic dental details while ensuring precise lip movements. Building upon the initial training phase, where the model learns to extract facial abstract information from audio inputs, we observe that the outputs tend to exhibit overly smoothed teeth and replicated lip motions from reference images, as demonstrated in <a href="#fig:fig_loss_ab" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_loss_ab">4</a>(b). To overcome these limitations, we incorporate two loss functions: an adversarial loss  and a SyncNet loss .

**Adversarial Loss.** The adversarial loss  is designed to enable the generator to capture intricate details by competing against two discriminators: one focused on the entire face $`\mathcal D_{face}`$ and another specifically targeting the lip region $`\mathcal D_{lip}`$. For the lip discriminator $`\mathcal D_{lip}`$, the input region is carefully cropped based on the lip landmarks, **expand** to a fixed size of and fed into the network without any resizing operations. We chose the expand method over resizing because resizing degrades lip generation quality, resulting in inaccurate and unrealistic mouth shapes. The optimization objective for the adversarial loss is formulated as:

``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{adv} = \mathcal{L}_{adv,face}+\mathcal{L}_{adv,lip},
\end{equation}
```
where
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{adv,face} = -\mathbb{E}_{A_{mel}^{t},I^{t}_{ref}} [ \mathcal D_{face}(I^{t}_{o})],
\end{equation}
```
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{adv,lip} = -\mathbb{E}_{A_{mel}^{t},I^{t}_{ref}} [ \mathcal D_{lip}(I^{t}_{lip})].
\end{equation}
```

**Sync Loss.** The SyncNet loss promotes lip movement learning by aligning the generated frames with the audio . Specifically, we apply a SyncNet $`\mathcal S`$ that takes $`N`$ pairs of audio and image frames as input. The output features are then used to calculate the cosine similarity. The optimization objective is:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{sync} = \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i}^{N} -\log[{CosSim}(\mathcal S(A^{i}_{mel}, I^{i}_o))].
\label{loss:syncloss}
\end{equation}
```

The overall optimization objective for this stage is:
``` math
\begin{align}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{stage2}} = \mathcal{L}_{\text{stage1}} + \lambda_{adv} \mathcal{L}_{adv} 
+ \lambda_{sync} \mathcal{L}_{\text{sync}}.
\label{loss:stage2}
\end{align}
```

<figure id="fig:fig_loss_ab" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="image/fig_second_stage.pdf" />
<figcaption> (a) Identity image during Inference. (b) First-stage model generates smooth teeth. (c) SyncNet loss promotes accurate lip movements but causes blurring. (d) GAN loss enhances clear teeth but replicates the original lip. (e) After applying DMS, both accurate lip movements and clear teeth are generated. </figcaption>
</figure>

**Dynamic Margin Sampling.** When optimizing $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{stage2}}`$, we observe conflicts between the adversarial loss and the SyncNet loss. Specifically, optimizing the adversarial loss alone can produce clear teeth but causes the model to replicate the reference lip movements, especially when the reference image shows teeth, as illustrated in <a href="#fig:fig_loss_ab" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_loss_ab">4</a>(d). Conversely, as shown in <a href="#fig:fig_loss_ab" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_loss_ab">4</a>(c), optimizing the SyncNet loss alone enables the model to close the mouth during silent periods but results in blurry lip movements when speaking. When both losses are optimized simultaneously, the SyncNet loss becomes difficult to converge, and the model’s behavior tends towards that shown in <a href="#fig:fig_loss_ab" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_loss_ab">4</a>(d).

Prior works  have noted that the mapping from audio to lip movements is inherently weak. Stronger conditions, such as identity constraints or other more dominant learning tasks, can easily overshadow lip-sync learning. Additionally, we have identified and localized a previously overlooked issue in previous methods : the leakage of lip movement information in training data pairs. The left side of <a href="#fig:fig_DMS" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_DMS">5</a> illustrates this issue. This may lead to the model directly copying the reference’s lip movements and ignoring the actual changes in lip movements, as shown in <a href="#fig:fig_loss_ab" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_loss_ab">4</a>(d).

We propose Dynamic Margin Sampling (DMS) to disrupt this implicit “hint” from the data. Specially, we introduce random margins around the chin area when cropping $`I_{\text{ref}}^{t}`$ and $`I_{\text{gt}}^{t}`$. It is crucial that the margins for $`I_{\text{ref}}^{t}`$ and $`I_{\text{gt}}^{t}`$ are independently and randomly generated; otherwise, the hint remains. As shown in <a href="#fig:fig_DMS" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_DMS">5</a>, after applying DMS, the information from unmasked regions (e.g., the nose area) no longer directly indicates the degree of mouth opening, thereby forcing the model to rely on the audio input to generate accurate lip movements.

<figure id="fig:fig_DMS" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="image/fig_DMS.pdf" />
<figcaption>The principle of Dynamic Margin Sampling (DMS) in promoting lip movement learning. Without DMS, the model can easily infer the general lip shape of <span class="math inline"><em>I</em><sub><em>g</em><em>t</em></sub><sup><em>t</em></sup></span> from the relative position of the nose in the input images <span class="math inline"><em>I</em><sub>ref</sub><sup><em>t</em></sup></span> and <span class="math inline"><em>I</em><sub><em>s</em></sub><sup><em>t</em></sup></span>. With DMS, this cue is weakened, forcing the model to learn the lip movements.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Experiments

<div class="table*">

<div class="center">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;"><strong>Method</strong></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><strong>Type</strong></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong>HTDF</strong></th>
<th colspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><strong>VFHQ</strong></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>3-5</span> (lr)<span>6-8</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">FID <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">CSIM <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">LSE-C <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">FID <span class="math inline">↓</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">CSIM <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">LSE-C <span class="math inline">↑</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Wav2Lip <span class="citation" data-cites="prajwal2020lip"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">GAN</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">11.55</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.42</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">14.99</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.82</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">VideoRetalking <span class="citation" data-cites="cheng2022videoretalking"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">GAN</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">11.29</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.59</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">15.83</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.79</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.13</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">DI-Net <span class="citation" data-cites="zhang2023dinet"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">GAN</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.94</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">15.03</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.71</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.37</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">IP-LAP <span class="citation" data-cites="zhong2023identity"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">GAN</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.86</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.47</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10.95</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.85</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.88</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">LatentSync <span class="citation" data-cites="li2024latentsync"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Diffusion</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8.41</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>7.90</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9.89</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.82</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>6.79</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">SyncLab <span class="citation" data-cites="sync_so_projects"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">–</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10.85</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.86</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.37</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">9.85</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.85</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.22</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Ground Truth</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">–</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.73</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.93</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">MuseTalk</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">GAN</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>6.52</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.86</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.53</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>7.07</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.85</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.77</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

</div>

## Experimental Setup

#### Model Architecture.

MuseTalk’s implementation adopts the pre-trained VAE model and the multimodal U-Net architecture from Latent Diffusion . For the audio encoder, we opt for the lightweight Whisper-Tiny model , which provides effective audio feature extraction. The audio features are integrated into the U-Net through cross-attention layers after undergoing reshaping and reorganization to match the required dimensions.

#### Training Details.

We use 8 NVIDIA H20 GPUs for training. In the Facial Abstract Pretraining stage, the model is trained with loss function $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{stage1}}`$ (described in <a href="#loss:stage1" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="loss:stage1">[loss:stage1]</a>) for 200,000 steps using the batch size of 32 per GPU. The AdamW optimizer  with a learning rate of $`2 \times 10^{-5}`$ is employed. This stage costs 60 hours.

During the Lip-Sync Adversarial Finetuning stage, the model undergoes further refinement with the loss function $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{stage2}}`$ (described in <a href="#loss:stage2" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="loss:stage2">[loss:stage2]</a>) for additional 20,000 steps. The parameter $`N`$ in $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{sync}}`$ (described in <a href="#loss:syncloss" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="loss:syncloss">[loss:syncloss]</a>) is set to 16, and the batch size per GPU is reduced to 2 to accommodate the increased computational demands of the adversarial training. The learning rate is adjusted to $`5 \times 10^{-6}`$ to facilitate fine-grained updates. This finetuning stage completes in approximately 30 hours. The loss hyper-parameters are set as follows: $`\lambda_{vgg}=0.01`$, $`\lambda_{adv}=0.1`$, $`\lambda_{sync}=0.05`$.

#### Dataset Preparation.

We collected publicly available talking head datasets . To ensure high-quality data, we employed a rigorous data filtering pipeline. The final dataset spans approximately **24** hours in total duration. Details of the data filtering process are provided in the supplementary materials. For evaluation, we randomly selected 26 videos from HDTF and 10 videos from VFHQ, using the remainder for training. All videos were segmented into clips for both training and testing phases. For preprocessing, we detected faces in each frame as Regions of Interest (ROIs), which were subsequently cropped and resized to $`256 \times 256`$ pixels. The parameter $`k`$ in the IFS was set to $`50\%`$ of the video length. The input size of discriminator $`\mathcal D_{lip}`$ is set to $`64\times128`$.

During testing, we adopted a protocol mirroring real-world scenarios, where the video and audio inputs are sourced independently, and the reference image is extracted from the current frame. This unpaired evaluation protocol aligns with that used by Wav2Lip  and VideoRetalking , ensuring a fair comparison.

<figure id="results_sota" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="image/fig_qualitative.pdf" />
<figcaption> Qualitative comparisons on HDTF <span class="citation" data-cites="zhang2021flow"></span> (left) and VFHQ <span class="citation" data-cites="xie2022vfhq"></span> (right). The first two rows show the input video frames and the lips corresponding to the audio. The arrow shows the lip movement trend (zoom in for finer details). Additional video results are provided in the supplementary materials. </figcaption>
</figure>

#### Evaluation Metrics.

The experiments are designed to assess the method’s visual fidelity, identity preservation, and lip synchronization capabilities. To evaluate visual quality, we use the Frechet Inception Distance (FID) , which measures the similarity between generated and real image distributions, providing a robust metric for visual fidelity without ground-truth talking videos. Identity preservation is evaluated using cosine similarity (CSIM) between the identity embeddings  of the source and generated images. Lip synchronization is evaluated using lip-sync-error confidence (LSE-C) .

#### Compared Baselines.

We benchmark MuseTalk against a range of SOTA video dubbing approaches. For fair comparison, we omit the face restoration  procedure if required in the original methods. Each of them representing distinct technical advancements in the field: (1) **Wav2Lip** : Pioneering work using a robust lip-sync discriminator for realistic synchronization; (2) **VideoRetalking** : Three-stage pipeline for high-quality lip synchronization; (3) **DI-Net** : Dual-encoder framework with facial action units for photo-realistic and emotion-consistent talking face videos; (4) **IP-LAP** : Two-stage framework combining Transformer-based landmarks with multi-reference alignment for identity preservation; (5) **LatentSync** : Integrates pixel-space SyncNet into latent diffusion for efficient, high-fidelity lip-sync generation; (6) **SyncLab** : Commercial software for lip-syncing models, focusing on cutting-edge AI video solutions.

## Quantitative Evaluation

#### Benchmark.

Table <a href="#tab:performance" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:performance">[tab:performance]</a> presents the quantitative analysis on the HDTF and VFHQ datasets. MuseTalk demonstrates superior performance, achieving the lowest FID scores (**6.52** on HDTF and **7.07** on VFHQ) and the highest CSIM scores (**0.86** on HDTF and **0.85** on VFHQ), outperforming existing methods. While its LSE-C scores are slightly lower than some competitors, MuseTalk strikes a remarkable balance between visual fidelity and lip-synchronization accuracy.

Analyzing the baseline methods, Wav2Lip  and VideoRetalking  exhibit relatively lower visual quality, as evidenced by their higher FID scores (e.g., 11.55 vs. 6.52 on HDTF for MuseTalk). This discrepancy stems from their training on downscaled face regions (96 × 96 pixels), which compromises image clarity. In contrast, DI-Net  achieves the second-lowest FID score on HDTF (6.94) through its deformation-based approach, which effectively preserves high-frequency texture details. However, its identity preservation capability is notably limited, as reflected in its subpar CSIM score (0.80 on HDTF and 0.71 on VFHQ). This weakness arises from its reliance on random reference image sampling, which introduces redundancy and hinders natural lip movements, ultimately affecting its LSE-C performance.

Among GAN-based approaches, IP-LAP  stands out with the highest CSIM score (**0.86**) on HDTF, showcasing exceptional identity preservation. However, it suffers from low visual quality and lip-synchronization capabilities. Turning to diffusion models, LatentSync  achieves the best LSE-C score (**7.90** on HDTF), indicating superior lip-synchronization capabilities. However, its non-real-time nature limits its practicality for real-world applications. In contrast, MuseTalk runs in real-time, achieving 30 FPS at a 256×256 resolution on an NVIDIA V100 GPU with preloaded data.

In summary, MuseTalk is the most balanced solution, achieving great performance across multiple metrics while maintaining real-time capabilities. Its lip-sync accuracy is on par with that of the commercial software SyncLab .

#### User Study.

To assess the quality of lip synchronization, human judgment is relied upon. A user study was conducted to further evaluate the performance of our proposed method. For this study, dubbed videos were created by different methods using 36 unsynced audio-video pairs from the HDTF datasets and the VFHQ datasets. Ten participants were asked to rate each video based on visual quality, identity consistency, and lip-sync accuracy. They were provided with a five-point scale (with 1 being the lowest and 5 being the highest) for their evaluations. A total of 360 ratings were collected.

In the subjective evaluation, method names were hidden and videos were randomly shuffled to ensure unbiased assessment. Annotators saw labels like “Method 1” and “Method 2” without knowing their specific methods, and the same label across different pairs did not correspond to the same method. This ensured fairness and prevented bias.

<div class="center">

<div id="user-study">

| **Method**      | **VQ$`\uparrow`$** | **IC$`\uparrow`$** | **LSQ$`\uparrow`$** |
|:----------------|:------------------:|:------------------:|:-------------------:|
| Wav2Lip         |        2.19        |        3.07        |        2.70         |
| VideoRetalking  |        3.35        |        3.14        |        3.58         |
| DINet           |        2.92        |        2.40        |        2.57         |
| LatentSync      |        3.71        |        3.93        |      **4.07**       |
| SyncLab         |        3.87        |        3.71        |        3.49         |
| MuseTalk        |      **4.26**      |      **4.15**      |        3.77         |

User Study. The best results are shown in **bold**. VQ: Visual Quality; IC: Identity Consistency; LSQ: Lip-Sync Quality.

</div>

</div>

As indicated in <a href="#user-study" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="user-study">1</a>, the majority of participants awarded higher scores to MuseTalk in terms of visual quality, lip-sync quality, and identity consistency. More visualization can be found in the supplementary materials.

## Qualitative Evaluation

Two illustrative examples are included in <a href="#results_sota" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="results_sota">6</a>. Wav2Lip  often produces synthesized mouth regions that appear blurry. VideoRetalking  results in jagged artifacts around the lip area and overly smooths the face region. DI-Net  induces noticeable changes in the subject’s identity within the generated results. IP-LAP  maintains identity relatively well but generates inconsistent lip movements. LatentSync  and SyncLab  generate clear facial and dental details but require longer computation times compared to other methods. In contrast, MuseTalk achieves a better balance in lip movement consistency, identity preservation, and efficiency.

## Ablation Studies

#### Informative Frame Sampling.

We tested various values of $`k`$ across different percentages (25%, 50%, and 75%) of the total candidate frames to identify its optimal value. The results are shown in <a href="#ablation-IFS" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="ablation-IFS">2</a>, highlighting the effects of different $`k`$ values on overall performance.

As seen in the table, the IFS strategy achieves peak performance when $`k`$ is set to 50% of the candidate frames. Specifically, the Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) reaches its minimum at 6.52, indicating the smallest discrepancy between generated and real images, and thus the highest image quality. Meanwhile, the Cosine Similarity (CSIM) reaches its maximum at 0.86, reflecting the highest similarity between generated and real images. Additionally, the LSE-C value is maximized at 6.53, further confirming the superior performance of the IFS strategy under this setting. In contrast, random sampling yields significantly inferior results, with an FID of 9.24, a CSIM of 0.79, and an LSE-C of 4.41.

<div class="center">

<div id="ablation-IFS">

| **Sampling strategy** | **FID$`\downarrow`$** | **CSIM$`\uparrow`$** | **LSE-C$`\uparrow`$** |  |
|:---|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| Random | 9.24 | 0.79 | 4.41 |  |
| IFS (k=25%) | 8.31 | 0.83 | 2.94 |  |
| IFS (k=50%) | **6.52** | **0.86** | **6.53** |  |
| IFS (k=75%) | 11.22 | 0.72 | 3.27 |  |

Ablation study for sampling method on HDTF  benchmark. The best results are shown in **bold**.

</div>

</div>

#### Dynamic Margin Sampling.

Dynamic Margin Sampling (DMS) generates random margins for the chin-to-boundary distance from a normal distribution $`\mathcal{N}(\mu, \sigma)`$ within one standard deviation. We investigate two critical design choices: (1) the optimal margin magnitude and (2) whether to share margins between reference ($`I_{\text{ref}}^{t}`$) and source ($`I_{s}^{t}`$) images. These choices significantly affect lip generation quality.

To explore these factors, we evaluated three configurations: (i) a margin drawn from $`\mathcal{N}(20, 20)`$ with independent margins for each image; (ii) a margin drawn from $`\mathcal{N}(10, 10)`$ with shared margins between the reference and source images; and (iii) a margin drawn from $`\mathcal{N}(10, 10)`$ with independent margins for each image.

<div class="center">

<div id="ablation-DMS">

| **DMS setting** | **FID$`\downarrow`$** | **CSIM$`\uparrow`$** | **LSE-C$`\uparrow`$** |  |
|:---|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| $`\mathcal N(20,20)`$ + idp margin | 11.95 | 0.81 | 5.78 |  |
| $`\mathcal N(10,10)`$ + shared margin | **6.43** | 0.85 | 4.95 |  |
| $`\mathcal N(10,10)`$ + idp margin | 6.52 | **0.86** | **6.53** |  |

Ablation study for different DMS settings on HDTF  benchmark. The “idp” means independent.

</div>

</div>

Table <a href="#ablation-DMS" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ablation-DMS">3</a> shows that the larger margin setting (i) achieves lower FID and CSIM scores. This is because the highly variable margins force the model to focus more on background information, making it difficult to accurately determine the chin position and resulting in numerous artifacts in the generated images. The margin-sharing setting (ii) degrades lip accuracy because when the margins of $`I_{\text{ref}}^{t}`$ and $`I_{s}^{t}`$ are identical, the model can infer the mouth shape of $`I_{\text{gt}}^{t}`$ based on the nose position, thereby reintroducing information leakage (described in <a href="#fig:fig_DMS" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:fig_DMS">5</a>). The configuration (iii) achieves optimal performance by adopting a more moderate margin that effectively addresses information leakage without compromising FID and CSIM scores.

We use the optimal setting identified from these experiments for all evaluations described in <a href="#sec:experiments" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:experiments">4</a>.

# Conclusion

This paper introduces MuseTalk, a novel framework for real-time, high-quality lip-synced generation for video dubbing. By modeling the audio-visual relationship in the VAE latent space, MuseTalk bypasses the computationally intensive diffusion process and outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. Its framework integrates two key innovations: Informative Frame Sampling and Dynamic Margin Sampling, which address the inherent trade-offs in GAN-based video dubbing methods, enhancing both the accuracy of lip movements and the fidelity of the generated videos. Comprehensive evaluations highlight MuseTalk’s effectiveness, achieving the lowest FID, highest CSIM, and competitive LSE-C scores. MuseTalk shows promise for transforming digital communication and multimedia applications, with future work exploring multilingual support and broader virtual content creation.

[^1]: Equal contribution.

[^2]: Corresponding author

[^3]: Work performed during an internship at Tencent Music Entertainment

## References

1. Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli.
\newblock wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33:\penalty0 12449--12460, 2020.
2. Hejia Chen, Haoxian Zhang, Shoulong Zhang, Xiaoqiang Liu, Sisi Zhuang, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan, Di ZHANG, and Shuai Li.
\newblock {Cafe-Talk}: Generating 3d talking face animation with multimodal coarse-and fine-grained control.
\newblock In \emph{The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations}.
3. Lele Chen, Zhiheng Li, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Lip movements generation at a glance.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV)}, pages 520--535, 2018.
4. Lele Chen, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic pixel-wise loss.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 7832--7841, 2019.
5. Zhiyuan Chen, Jiajiong Cao, Zhiquan Chen, Yuming Li, and Chenguang Ma.
\newblock Echomimic: Lifelike audio-driven portrait animations through editable landmark conditions.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08136}, 2024. [arXiv:2407.08136](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08136)
6. Kun Cheng, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Menghan Xia, Fei Yin, Mingrui Zhu, Xuan Wang, Jue Wang, and Nannan Wang.
\newblock Videoretalking: Audio-based lip synchronization for talking head video editing in the wild.
\newblock In \emph{SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers}, pages 1--9, 2022.
7. Dipanjan Das, Sandika Biswas, Sanjana Sinha, and Brojeshwar Bhowmick.
\newblock Speech-driven facial animation using cascaded gans for learning of motion and texture.
\newblock In \emph{Computer Vision--ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23--28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXX 16}, pages 408--424. Springer, 2020.
8. Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
\newblock Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 4690--4699, 2019.
9. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial nets.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 27, 2014.
10. Jiazhi Guan, Zhanwang Zhang, Hang Zhou, Tianshu Hu, Kaisiyuan Wang, Dongliang He, Haocheng Feng, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, Ziwei Liu, et~al.
\newblock Stylesync: High-fidelity generalized and personalized lip sync in style-based generator.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 1505--1515, 2023.
11. Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron~C Courville.
\newblock Improved training of wasserstein gans.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
12. Jianzhu Guo, Dingyun Zhang, Xiaoqiang Liu, Zhizhou Zhong, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan, and Di Zhang.
\newblock Liveportrait: Efficient portrait animation with stitching and retargeting control.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03168}, 2024. [arXiv:2407.03168](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03168)
13. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision}, pages 5784--5794, 2021.
14. Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai.
\newblock Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04725}, 2023. [arXiv:2307.04725](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04725)
15. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
16. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.
\newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33:\penalty0 6840--6851, 2020.
17. Li Hu.
\newblock Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis for character animation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 8153--8163, 2024.
18. Zhen Jia, Zhang Zhang, Liang Wang, and Tieniu Tan.
\newblock Human image generation: A comprehensive survey.
\newblock \emph{ACM Computing Surveys}, 56\penalty0 (11):\penalty0 1--39, 2024.
19. Jianwen Jiang, Chao Liang, Jiaqi Yang, Gaojie Lin, Tianyun Zhong, and Yanbo Zheng.
\newblock Loopy: Taming audio-driven portrait avatar with long-term motion dependency.
\newblock In \emph{The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2024.
20. Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei.
\newblock Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
\newblock In \emph{Computer Vision--ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 14}, pages 694--711. Springer, 2016.
21. Diederik~P Kingma, Max Welling, et~al.
\newblock Auto-encoding variational bayes, 2013.
22. Chunyu Li, Chao Zhang, Weikai Xu, Jinghui Xie, Weiguo Feng, Bingyue Peng, and Weiwei Xing.
\newblock Latentsync: Audio conditioned latent diffusion models for lip sync.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09262}, 2024. [arXiv:2412.09262](./2412.09262.md)
23. Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne Wu, and Bolei Zhou.
\newblock Semantic-aware implicit neural audio-driven video portrait generation.
\newblock In \emph{European conference on computer vision}, pages 106--125. Springer, 2022.
24. Ilya Loshchilov, Frank Hutter, et~al.
\newblock Fixing weight decay regularization in adam.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101}, 5:\penalty0 5, 2017. [arXiv:1711.05101](https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101)
25. Junxian Ma, Shiwen Wang, Jian Yang, Junyi Hu, Jian Liang, Guosheng Lin, Kai Li, Yu Meng, et~al.
\newblock Sayanything: Audio-driven lip synchronization with conditional video diffusion.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11515}, 2025. [arXiv:2502.11515](../2025/2502.11515.md)
26. Xudong Mao, Qing Li, Haoran Xie, Raymond~YK Lau, Zhen Wang, and Stephen Paul~Smolley.
\newblock Least squares generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision}, pages 2794--2802, 2017.
27. Lars Mescheder, Andreas Geiger, and Sebastian Nowozin.
\newblock Which training methods for gans do actually converge?
\newblock In \emph{International conference on machine learning}, pages 3481--3490. PMLR, 2018.
28. Moustafa Meshry, Saksham Suri, Larry~S Davis, and Abhinav Shrivastava.
\newblock Learned spatial representations for few-shot talking-head synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision}, pages 13829--13838, 2021.
29. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis.
\newblock \emph{Communications of the ACM}, 65\penalty0 (1):\penalty0 99--106, 2021.
30. Thomas M{\"u}ller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller.
\newblock Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding.
\newblock \emph{ACM transactions on graphics (TOG)}, 41\penalty0 (4):\penalty0 1--15, 2022.
31. Ziqiao Peng, Wentao Hu, Yue Shi, Xiangyu Zhu, Xiaomei Zhang, Hao Zhao, Jun He, Hongyan Liu, and Zhaoxin Fan.
\newblock Synctalk: The devil is in the synchronization for talking head synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 666--676, 2024.
32. KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
33. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
\newblock Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision.
\newblock In \emph{International conference on machine learning}, pages 28492--28518. PMLR, 2023.
34. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj{\"o}rn Ommer.
\newblock High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 10684--10695, 2022.
35. Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox.
\newblock U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
\newblock In \emph{Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention--MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III 18}, pages 234--241. Springer, 2015.
36. Shuai Shen, Wenliang Zhao, Zibin Meng, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Difftalk: Crafting diffusion models for generalized audio-driven portraits animation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 1982--1991, 2023.
37. Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556}, 2014. [arXiv:1409.1556](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556)
38. Yasheng Sun, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Zhibin Hong, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, Jingdong Wang, Ziwei Liu, and Koike Hideki.
\newblock Masked lip-sync prediction by audio-visual contextual exploitation in transformers.
\newblock In \emph{SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers}, pages 1--9, 2022.
39. {SyncLab}.
\newblock {SyncLab Projects}.
\newblock \url{https://sync.so/projects}.
40. Jiaxiang Tang, Kaisiyuan Wang, Hang Zhou, Xiaokang Chen, Dongliang He, Tianshu Hu, Jingtuo Liu, Gang Zeng, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Real-time neural radiance talking portrait synthesis via audio-spatial decomposition.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12368}, 2022. [arXiv:2211.12368](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12368)
41. Linrui Tian, Qi Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo.
\newblock Emo: Emote portrait alive generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions.
\newblock In \emph{European Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 244--260. Springer, 2024.
42. Cong Wang, Kuan Tian, Jun Zhang, Yonghang Guan, Feng Luo, Fei Shen, Zhiwei Jiang, Qing Gu, Xiao Han, and Wei Yang.
\newblock V-express: Conditional dropout for progressive training of portrait video generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02511}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.02511](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02511)
43. Jiadong Wang, Xinyuan Qian, Malu Zhang, Robby~T Tan, and Haizhou Li.
\newblock Seeing what you said: Talking face generation guided by a lip reading expert.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 14653--14662, 2023.
44. Xintao Wang, Yu Li, Honglun Zhang, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Towards real-world blind face restoration with generative facial prior.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 9168--9178, 2021.
45. Liangbin Xie, Xintao Wang, Honglun Zhang, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Vfhq: A high-quality dataset and benchmark for video face super-resolution.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 657--666, 2022.
46. Zhen Xing, Qijun Feng, Haoran Chen, Qi Dai, Han Hu, Hang Xu, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang.
\newblock A survey on video diffusion models.
\newblock \emph{ACM Computing Surveys}, 57\penalty0 (2):\penalty0 1--42, 2024.
47. Mingwang Xu, Hui Li, Qingkun Su, Hanlin Shang, Liwei Zhang, Ce Liu, Jingdong Wang, Yao Yao, and Siyu Zhu.
\newblock Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait image animation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08801}, 2024{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2406.08801](./2406.08801.md)
48. Sicheng Xu, Guojun Chen, Yu-Xiao Guo, Jiaolong Yang, Chong Li, Zhenyu Zang, Yizhong Zhang, Xin Tong, and Baining Guo.
\newblock Vasa-1: Lifelike audio-driven talking faces generated in real time.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 37:\penalty0 660--684, 2025.
49. Zunnan Xu, Yukang Lin, Haonan Han, Sicheng Yang, Ronghui Li, Yachao Zhang, and Xiu Li.
\newblock Mambatalk: Efficient holistic gesture synthesis with selective state space models.
\newblock In \emph{The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems}, 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
50. Wenxuan Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Xuan Wang, Yong Zhang, Xi Shen, Yu Guo, Ying Shan, and Fei Wang.
\newblock Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 8652--8661, 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
51. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 3661--3670, 2021.
52. Zhimeng Zhang, Zhipeng Hu, Wenjin Deng, Changjie Fan, Tangjie Lv, and Yu Ding.
\newblock Dinet: Deformation inpainting network for realistic face visually dubbing on high resolution video.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence}, pages 3543--3551, 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
53. Rui Zhen, Wenchao Song, Qiang He, Juan Cao, Lei Shi, and Jia Luo.
\newblock Human-computer interaction system: A survey of talking-head generation.
\newblock \emph{Electronics}, 12\penalty0 (1):\penalty0 218, 2023.
54. Weizhi Zhong, Chaowei Fang, Yinqi Cai, Pengxu Wei, Gangming Zhao, Liang Lin, and Guanbin Li.
\newblock Identity-preserving talking face generation with landmark and appearance priors.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 9729--9738, 2023.
55. Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang.
\newblock Talking face generation by adversarially disentangled audio-visual representation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence}, pages 9299--9306, 2019.
56. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 4176--4186, 2021.
57. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG)}, 39\penalty0 (6):\penalty0 1--15, 2020.
