---
arxiv_id: '2412.00719'
title: 'Synergizing Motion and Appearance: Multi-Scale Compensatory Codebooks for
  Talking Head Video Generation'
authors:
- Shuling Zhao
- Fa-Ting Hong
- Xiaoshui Huang
- Dan Xu
submitted: '2024-12-01'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.00719
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 3/47
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:16:22+00:00'
references_parsed: 47
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Experiments

## Implementation Details

**Datasets.** We conduct experiments on VoxCeleb1 and CelebV-HQ datasets. We train our model on VoxCeleb1 training set. For evaluation, we build the test set on VoxCeleb1 by randomly sample 50 videos from its test split. To evaluate the model’s generalization ability, we randomly select 50 videos from CelebV-HQ for testing.

**Metrics.** For same-identity reconstruction, we adopt PSNR, $`\mathcal{L}_1`$ and LPIPS following to evaluate the reconstruction quality. We also use FID to measure the realism of the generated video frames. Following , we employ Average Keypoint Distance (AKD) for motion transfer quality evaluation and Average Euclidean Distance (AED) for identity preservation quality evaluation.

## Comparison with State-of-the-art Methods

<figure id="fig:sota_comparison" data-latex-placement="tb">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/results/sota_qualitative_replaced_embed.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
</div>
<figcaption>Qualitative comparison with state-of-the-art methods for (a) same-identity reconstruction and (b) cross-identity reenactment on the VoxCeleb1 and CelebV-HQ datasets. Our method can generate high-quality facial images <span style="color: black">even under</span> large pose variations.</figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="table*">

</div>

We compare our method with a series of open-source state-of-the-art methods, including non-diffusion-based FOMM , <span style="color: black">LIA </span>, DaGAN , MCNet and MRFA , and diffusion-based AniPortrait and Follow-Your-Emoji (FYE) .

**Same-identity Reconstruction.** To evaluate the performance on same-identity reconstruction, we use the first frame of each video as the source image and reconstruct the whole video. Tab. <a href="#table:sota_sameid" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:sota_sameid">[table:sota_sameid]</a> presents the quantitative results for same-identity reconstruction. Our method outperforms the other methods almost on all metrics on VoxCeleb1 dataset and remains competitive when generalized to the more challenging CelebV-HQ. Compared with those unsupervised methods , our method achieves better motion estimation, *e.g.,* our method gets the best AKD score on CelebV-HQ dataset. This result verifies the effectiveness of our designed multi-scale motion codebook and its generalizability. For the results of image quality (*i.e.,* FID, PSNR, $`\mathcal{L}_1`$, LPIPS), our method outperforms other methods on VoxCeleb1 dataset, even those diffusion methods  trained with larger-scale datasets. It indicates that our designed multi-scale appearance codebook is capable to compensate for the intermediate warped feature for better talking head video generation. We also show some qualitative results in Fig. <a href="#fig:sota_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:sota_comparison">1</a>a. Our method can generate plausible unseen facial regions (row 2) and handle large motion (row 4) with accuracy.

**Cross-identity Reenactment.** We conduct cross-identity reenactment experiments to validate our method. The qualitative results shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:sota_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:sota_comparison">1</a>b indicate the superiority of our method. Compared to non-diffusion-based MCNet  and MRFA , our method better preserves facial details (row 1 and 3), even under large motions (row 2 and 4). Diffusion-based FYE  often <span style="color: black">produces</span> exaggerated expressions and <span style="color: black">struggles</span> to imitate the driving expressions accurately, likely due to its reliance on landmark-based embeddings without explicitly modeling motion. These findings confirm the effectiveness of our framework. More experimental results are shown in the supplementary material.

## Ablation Study

We perform ablation studies to assess the effectiveness of the learned multi-scale motion and appearance compensatory codebooks. The model variants in Tab. <a href="#table:ablation_vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:ablation_vox1">[table:ablation_vox1]</a> are as follows: **(i)** “Baseline" is the model without any compensatory codebook. **(ii)** “Baseline+SMC" includes only a single-scale motion codebook, compensating <span style="color: black">for</span> the initial motion flow only at scale $`1`$, and the compensated result is used to warp multi-scale features. **(iii)** “Baseline+MMC" includes a multi-scale motion codebook to compensate for the motion flows across scales. **(iv)** “Baseline+MMC+SAC" adds a single-scale appearance codebook to (iii), compensating only the warped feature at scale $`1`$. **(v)** “Baseline+MMC+MAC" is our full model with both multi-scale motion and appearance codebooks. We present the quantitative results in Tab. <a href="#table:ablation_vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:ablation_vox1">[table:ablation_vox1]</a> and qualitative comparisons of (i), (iii), and (v) in Fig. <a href="#fig:ablation_quanlitative" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ablation_quanlitative">4</a>.

**Effect of Joint Codebook Learning.** To evaluate the effectiveness of our jointly learned multi-scale motion and appearance codebooks, we visualize the reconstructed multi-scale motion flows with the motion codebook in Fig. <a href="#fig:effect_motion_cdbk_learning" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:effect_motion_cdbk_learning">2</a> and appearance features with the appearance codebook in Fig. <a href="#fig:effect_app_cdbk_learning" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:effect_app_cdbk_learning">3</a>. For the motion flows, results in Fig. <a href="#fig:effect_motion_cdbk_learning" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:effect_motion_cdbk_learning">2</a> are output of the motion flow decoder $`\mathcal{D}_{M}`$ given the quantized motion flow features. Despite the limited number of codes, our multi-scale motion codebook can reconstruct high-quality motion flows, confirming its ability to capture typical local motion patterns. For appearance features, we visualize the quantized features directly in Fig. <a href="#fig:effect_app_cdbk_learning" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:effect_app_cdbk_learning">3</a>. Despite some quantization loss, the multi-scale appearance codebook reconstructs the driving features well with limited codes, <span style="color: black">demonstrating its</span> ability to store informative local appearance details. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of joint codebook learning, allowing the codebooks to store expressive local motion and appearance patterns.

<figure id="fig:effect_motion_cdbk_learning" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/results/effect_motion_cdbk_learning_2__embed.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
</div>
<figcaption>Visulization of the original and reconstructed motion flows for different scales. Our multi-scale motion codebook can reconstruct multi-scale motion flows with high quality.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:effect_app_cdbk_learning" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/results/effect_app_cdbk_learning_embed.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
</div>
<figcaption>Visulization of the original and reconstructed driving features. Our multi-scale appearance codebook can reconstruct multi-scale appearance features with acceptable quantization loss.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:ablation_quanlitative" data-latex-placement="!tb">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/results/ablation_quanlitative_1_embed.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
</div>
<figcaption>Qualitative ablation study on multi-scale motion and appearance codebook compensation. Both motion and appearance codebook compensation contribute to better generation quality.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Effect of Multi-scale Motion Codebook Compensation.** The second row of Tab. <a href="#table:ablation_vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:ablation_vox1">[table:ablation_vox1]</a> shows that using single-scale motion codebook compensation already improves motion transfer and image quality, reflected by better PSNR, $`\mathcal{L}_1`$, LPIPS, and AKD compared to the baseline. This highlights the effectiveness of motion codebook compensation for talking head video generation. Multi-scale motion codebook compensation further enhances all metrics, underscoring the importance of handling motion flows at different scales for improved feature warping. Fig. <a href="#fig:ablation_quanlitative" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ablation_quanlitative">4</a> shows that multi-scale motion compensation achieves better motion transfer (e.g., head pose in row 1), reduces artifacts (e.g., hair in row 2), and preserves source identity (row 3). Fig. <a href="#fig:effect_motion_flow_update" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:effect_motion_flow_update">5</a> visualizes the motion flow compensation process, showing that the initial motion flow $`\mathbf{M}^0`$ is rough, but multi-scale compensation refines it iteratively with residuals $`\{\mathbf{M}_r^i\}_{i=1}^N`$, adding finer details as the scale increases for smoother, more face-adapted motion flows.

<figure id="fig:effect_motion_flow_update" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/results/effect_motion_flow_update_embed.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
</div>
<figcaption>Visualization of the motion flow compensation process. We present the initial motion flow <span class="math inline"><strong>M</strong><sup>0</sup></span>, the motion flow residual<span style="color: black">s</span> <span class="math inline">{<strong>M</strong><sub><em>r</em></sub><sup><em>i</em></sup>}<sub><em>i</em> = 1</sub><sup><em>N</em></sup></span> and the compensated motion flows <span class="math inline">{<strong>M</strong><sup><em>i</em></sup>}<sub><em>i</em> = 1</sub><sup><em>N</em></sup></span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:effect_app_feat_update" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/results/effect_app_feat_update_embed_2.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
</div>
<figcaption>Visualization of the appearance compensation results. We present the warped source features <span style="color: black"><span class="math inline">$\{\overline{\mathbf{F}}_w^i\}_{i=1}^N$</span></span> and the compensated appearance features <span style="color: black"><span class="math inline">$\{\overline{\mathbf{F}}_c^i\}_{i=1}^N$</span></span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Effect of Multi-scale Appearance Codebook Compensation.** The fourth row in Tab. <a href="#table:ablation_vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:ablation_vox1">[table:ablation_vox1]</a> shows that adding single-scale appearance codebook compensation on top of multi-scale motion codebook compensation improves FID, LPIPS, and AKD, indicating that appearance codebook compensation refines warped source features for more realistic image generation. However, there is a slight drop in PSNR, $`\mathcal{L}_1`$, and AED, likely due to a conflict between scale $`1`$ compensated appearance features and other warped features with warping artifacts. The fifth row shows consistent improvement, suggesting <span style="color: black">that</span> multi-scale appearance codebook compensation resolves this conflict and further refines warped features across scales, boosting overall performance. The last two columns in Fig. <a href="#fig:ablation_quanlitative" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:ablation_quanlitative">4</a> also verify that multi-scale appearance codebook compensation leads to more accurate motion (e.g., the mouth in row 1, eyes in row 2, and shoulders in row 3) with realistic facial details (e.g., the hair in row 2). Additionally, Fig. <a href="#fig:effect_app_feat_update" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:effect_app_feat_update">6</a> visualizes the compensated feature maps at different scales, showing more complete facial shapes and details compared to the warped feature <span style="color: black">$`\overline{\mathbf{F}}_w^i`$</span>. These results validate the effectiveness of multi-scale appearance codebook compensation.

## References

1. Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter.
\newblock A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces.
\newblock In \emph{Seminal Graphics Papers: Pushing the Boundaries, Volume 2}, pages 157--164. Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.
2. Stella Bounareli, Christos Tzelepis, Vasileios Argyriou, Ioannis Patras, and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock Hyperreenact: One-shot reenactment via jointly learning to refine and retarget faces.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, 2023.
3. Hongping Cai, Fei Yan, and Krystian Mikolajczyk.
\newblock Learning weights for codebook in image classification and retrieval.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2010.
4. Huiwen Chang, Han Zhang, Lu Jiang, Ce Liu, and William~T. Freeman.
\newblock Maskgit: Masked generative image transformer.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2022.
5. Gabriella Csurka, Christopher Dance, Lixin Fan, Jutta Willamowski, and C{\'e}dric Bray.
\newblock Visual categorization with bags of keypoints.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV Workshop}, 2004.
6. Nikita Drobyshev, Jenya Chelishev, Taras Khakhulin, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Victor Lempitsky, and Egor Zakharov.
\newblock Megaportraits: One-shot megapixel neural head avatars.
\newblock In \emph{ACM MM}, 2022.
7. Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer.
\newblock Taming transformers for high-resolution image synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2021.
8. Yao Feng, Haiwen Feng, Michael~J Black, and Timo Bolkart.
\newblock Learning an animatable detailed 3d face model from in-the-wild images.
\newblock \emph{ACM TOG}, 40\penalty0 (4):\penalty0 1--13, 2021.
9. Yue Gao, Yuan Zhou, Jinglu Wang, Xiao Li, Xiang Ming, and Yan Lu.
\newblock High-fidelity and freely controllable talking head video generation.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2023.
10. Yuchao Gu, Xintao Wang, Liangbin Xie, Chao Dong, Gen Li, Ying Shan, and Ming-Ming Cheng.
\newblock Vqfr: Blind face restoration with vector-quantized dictionary and parallel decoder.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV}, 2022.
11. Jianzhu Guo, Dingyun Zhang, Xiaoqiang Liu, Zhizhou Zhong, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan, and Di Zhang.
\newblock Liveportrait: Efficient portrait animation with stitching and retargeting control.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03168}, 2024. [arXiv:2407.03168](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03168)
12. Sungjoo Ha, Martin Kersner, Beomsu Kim, Seokjun Seo, and Dongyoung Kim.
\newblock Marionette: Few-shot face reenactment preserving identity of unseen targets.
\newblock In \emph{AAAI}, 2020.
13. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
\newblock Deep residual learning for image recognition.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2016.
14. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium.
\newblock In \emph{NeurIPS}, 2017.
15. Fa-Ting Hong and Dan Xu.
\newblock Implicit identity representation conditioned memory compensation network for talking head video generation.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, 2023.
16. Fa-Ting Hong, Longhao Zhang, Li Shen, and Dan Xu.
\newblock Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head video generation.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2022.
17. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila.
\newblock A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2019.
18. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
\newblock Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2020.
19. Yue Ma, Hongyu Liu, Hongfa Wang, Heng Pan, Yingqing He, Junkun Yuan, Ailing Zeng, Chengfei Cai, Heung-Yeung Shum, Wei Liu, et~al.
\newblock Follow-your-emoji: Fine-controllable and expressive freestyle portrait animation.
\newblock In \emph{SIGGRAPH Asia}, 2024.
20. Arsha Nagrani, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identification dataset.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612}, 2017. [arXiv:1706.08612](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08612)
21. Trevine Oorloff and Yaser Yacoob.
\newblock Robust one-shot face video re-enactment using hybrid latent spaces of stylegan2.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, 2023.
22. Yurui Ren, Ge Li, Yuanqi Chen, Thomas~H. Li, and Shan Liu.
\newblock Pirenderer: Controllable portrait image generation via semantic neural rendering.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, 2021.
23. Aliaksandr Siarohin, St{\'e}phane Lathuili{\`e}re, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe.
\newblock Animating arbitrary objects via deep motion transfer.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2019{\natexlab{a}}.
24. Aliaksandr Siarohin, St{\'e}phane Lathuili{\`e}re, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe.
\newblock First order motion model for image animation.
\newblock In \emph{NeurIPS}, 2019{\natexlab{b}}.
25. Jiale Tao, Shuhang Gu, Wen Li, and Lixin Duan.
\newblock Learning motion refinement for unsupervised face animation.
\newblock In \emph{NeurIPS}, 2024.
26. Aaron Van Den~Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et~al.
\newblock Neural discrete representation learning.
\newblock In \emph{NeurIPS}, 2017.
27. Hexiang Wang, Fengqi Liu, Qianyu Zhou, Ran Yi, Xin Tan, and Lizhuang Ma.
\newblock Continuous piecewise-affine based motion model for image animation.
\newblock In \emph{AAAI}, 2024.
28. Jiayu Wang, Kang Zhao, Shiwei Zhang, Yingya Zhang, Yujun Shen, Deli Zhao, and Jingren Zhou.
\newblock Lipformer: High-fidelity and generalizable talking face generation with a pre-learned facial codebook.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2023.
29. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video conferencing.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2021.
30. Xintao Wang, Ke Yu, Chao Dong, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Recovering realistic texture in image super-resolution by deep spatial feature transform.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2018.
31. Yaohui Wang, Di Yang, Francois Bremond, and Antitza Dantcheva.
\newblock Latent image animator: Learning to animate images via latent space navigation.
\newblock In \emph{ICLR}, 2022.
32. Huawei Wei, Zejun Yang, and Zhisheng Wang.
\newblock Aniportrait: Audio-driven synthesis of photorealistic portrait animation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17694}, 2024. [arXiv:2403.17694](./2403.17694.md)
33. Wayne Wu, Yunxuan Zhang, Cheng Li, Chen Qian, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Reenactgan: Learning to reenact faces via boundary transfer.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV}, 2018.
34. Liangbin Xie, Xintao Wang, Honglun Zhang, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Vfhq: A high-quality dataset and benchmark for video face super-resolution.
\newblock In \emph{CVPRW}, 2022.
35. Guangming Yao, Yi Yuan, Tianjia Shao, and Kun Zhou.
\newblock Mesh guided one-shot face reenactment using graph convolutional networks.
\newblock In \emph{ACM MM}, 2020.
36. Fei Yin, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Mingdeng Cao, Yanbo Fan, Xuan Wang, Qingyan Bai, Baoyuan Wu, Jue Wang, and Yujiu Yang.
\newblock Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution editable talking face generation via pre-trained stylegan.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV}, 2022.
37. Egor Zakharov, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Burkov, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Few-shot adversarial learning of realistic neural talking head models.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV}, 2019.
38. Egor Zakharov, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Aliaksandra Shysheya, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Fast bi-layer neural synthesis of one-shot realistic head avatars.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV}, 2020.
39. Bohan Zeng, Xuhui Liu, Sicheng Gao, Boyu Liu, Hong Li, Jianzhuang Liu, and Baochang Zhang.
\newblock Face animation with an attribute-guided diffusion model.
\newblock In \emph{CVPRW}, 2023.
40. Bowen Zhang, Chenyang Qi, Pan Zhang, Bo Zhang, HsiangTao Wu, Dong Chen, Qifeng Chen, Yong Wang, and Fang Wen.
\newblock Metaportrait: Identity-preserving talking head generation with fast personalized adaptation.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2023.
41. Wei Zhang, Akshat Surve, Xiaoli Fern, and Thomas Dietterich.
\newblock Learning non-redundant codebooks for classifying complex objects.
\newblock In \emph{ICML}, 2009.
42. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2021.
43. Jian Zhao and Hui Zhang.
\newblock Thin-plate spline motion model for image animation.
\newblock In \emph{CVPR}, 2022.
44. Ruiqi Zhao, Tianyi Wu, and Guodong Guo.
\newblock Sparse to dense motion transfer for face image animation.
\newblock In \emph{ICCV Workshops}, 2021.
45. Shangchen Zhou, Kelvin Chan, Chongyi Li, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Towards robust blind face restoration with codebook lookup transformer.
\newblock In \emph{NeurIPS}, 2022.
46. Hao Zhu, Wayne Wu, Wentao Zhu, Liming Jiang, Siwei Tang, Li Zhang, Ziwei Liu, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Celebv-hq: A large-scale video facial attributes dataset.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV}, 2022.
47. Xiangyu Zhu, Xiaoming Liu, Zhen Lei, and Stan~Z Li.
\newblock Face alignment in full pose range: A 3d total solution.
\newblock \emph{IEEE TPAMI}, 41\penalty0 (1):\penalty0 78--92, 2017.
