---
arxiv_id: "2007.12553"
title:
  "Style Transfer for Co-Speech Gesture Animation: A Multi-Speaker Conditional-Mixture
  Approach"
authors:
  - Chaitanya Ahuja
  - Dong Won Lee
  - Yukiko I. Nakano
  - Louis-Philippe Morency
submitted: "2020-07-24"
categories:
  - cs.CV
  - cs.RO
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.12553
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 12/60
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-21T00:31:45+00:00"
references_parsed: 60
arxiv_version: ""
---

Figure <a href="#fig:model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model">[fig:model]</a> shows an overview of our model, including the training inference pathways. A first component of our model is the audio encoder $`E^c_a`$, which takes as input the spoken audio $`X_a`$. During training, we also have the pose sequence of the speaker $`Y_p`$. This pose sequence is decomposed into content and style, with two specialized encoders $`E^c_p`$ and $`E^s_p`$. During training, the style for the pose sequence can either be concatenated with the audio or the pose content.

The pose sequences for multiple speakers are represented as a distribution with multiple modes . To decode from this multi-mode multimodal gesture space, we use a common generator $`G`$ with multiple sub-generators (or CMix-GAN) conditioned on input audio and style to decode both these embeddings to output pose $`\textbf{Y}_p`$.

Our loss function comprises of a mode-regularization loss (Section <a href="#ssec:cluster" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:cluster">0.1</a>) to ensure that audio and style embedding can sample from the appropriate marginal distribution of poses, a joint loss (Section <a href="#ssec:recon" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:recon">0.2</a>) to ensure latent distribution matching for content in a cross-modal translation task, a style consistency loss (Section <a href="#ssec:style" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:style">0.3</a>) to ensure that the correct style is being generated and an adversarial loss (Section <a href="#ssec:adv" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:adv">0.4</a>) that matches the generated pose distribution to the target pose distribution.

## M$`^2`$GS: Multi-mode Multimodal Gesture Space

Humans perform different styles of gestures, where each style consists of different kinds of gestures (i.e beat, metaphorical, emblematic, iconic and so on). Learning pose generators for multiple speakers, each with their own style of gestures, presents a distribution with multiple modes. These gestures have a tendency of switching from one mode to the other over time, which depends on style embeddings and content of the audio.

To prevent mode collapse we propose the use of mixture-model guided sub-generators , each learning a different mode of $`M^2`$ gesture space $`F_{\Phi|a,s}`$.

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathbf{\hat{Y}}_p = \sum_{m=1}^M \mathbf{\phi}_m G_m(\mathbf{Z}) = G(\textbf{Z})\label{eq:mm_func}
\end{equation}
```

where $`\textbf{Z} \in \lbrace \textbf{Z}_{a\rightarrow p}, \textbf{Z}_{p\rightarrow p}\rbrace`$ are cross-modal and self-modal latent spaces respectively. They are defined as $`\textbf{Z}_{a\rightarrow p} = \left[ E^c_a(\textbf{X}_a), E^s_p(\textbf{Y}_p)\bigotimes \textbf{S} \right]`$ and $`\textbf{Z}_{p\rightarrow p} = \left[ E^c_p(\textbf{Y}_p), E^s_p(\textbf{Y}_p)\bigotimes \textbf{S} \right]`$ where $`\textbf{S}`$ is the style embedding matrix (See Section <a href="#ssec:style" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ssec:style">0.3</a>) and $`\bigotimes`$ is $`\text{argmax}`$ for style ID followed by matrix multiplication. Pose sequence $`\hat{Y}_p \sim F_{p|\Phi}F_{\Phi|a,s}`$ represents the pose probability distribution conditioned on audio and style. $`G_m \sim F_{p|a, s}^m \hspace{0.1cm}\forall m \in \left[1, 2, \ldots M\right]`$ are sub-generator functions with corresponding mixture-model priors $`\Phi = \setLow{\mathbf{\phi}}{M}`$. These mixture model priors represent the $`M^2`$ gesture space and are estimated at inference time conditioned on the input audio and style.

**Estimating Mixture Model Priors:** During training, we partition poses $`Y_p`$ into $`M`$ clusters using an unsupervised approach, Lloyd’s algorithm . While other unsupervised clustering methods can also be used at this stage, we choose Lloyd’s algorithm for its simplicity and speed. Each of these clusters represent samples from probability distributions $`\set{F_{p|a, s}}{M}`$. If a sample belongs to the $`m^{th}`$ cluster, $`\phi_m = 1`$, otherwise $`\phi_m =0`$, making $`\Phi`$ a sequence of one-hot vectors. While training the generator $`G`$ with loss function $`\mathcal{L}_{\mbox{rec}}`$, if a sample belongs to the distribution $`F_{p|a, s}^m`$, only parameters of sub-generator $`G_m`$ are updated. Hence, each sub-generator learns different components of the true distribution, which are combined using Equation <a href="#eq:mm_func" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:mm_func">[eq:mm_func]</a> to give the generated pose.

At inference time, we do not have the true values of mixture-model priors $`\Phi`$. As mixture model priors modulate based on the style of the speaker and audio content at any given moment, we jointly learn a classification network $`H \sim F_{\Phi|a,s}`$ to estimate values of $`\Phi`$ in form of a mode regularization loss function

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{mix} = \mathbb{E}_{\Phi, \mathbf{Z}}\mbox{CCE}(\Phi, H(\mathbf{Z})) \label{eq:aux}
\end{equation}
```

where CCE is categorical cross-entropy.

## Joint Space of Style, Audio and Pose

A set of marginal distributions $`F_a`$ and $`F_s`$ are learnt by our content encoders $`E_a^c`$ and $`E_p^c`$, which together define the joint distribution of the generated poses: $`F_{p,a,s}`$. Since both cross-modal $`\textbf{Z}_{a\rightarrow p}`$ and self-modal $`\textbf{Z}_{p\rightarrow p}`$ latent spaces are designed to represent the same underlying content distribution, they should be consistent with each other. Using the same generator $`G`$ for decoding both of these embeddings yields content invariant generator. We enforce a reconstruction and joint loss which encourages a reduction in distance between $`\textbf{Z}_{a\rightarrow p}`$ and $`\textbf{Z}_{p\rightarrow p}`$. As cross-modal translation is not reversible for this task (i.e. audio signal cannot be generated with pose input), a bi-directional reconstruction loss for latent distribution matching cannot be directly used. This joint loss achieves the same goal of latent distribution matching in a uni-modal translation task but for a cross-modal translation task.

```math
\begin{align}
    \mathcal{L}_{joint} &= \mathbb{E}_{\mathbf{Y}_p}\| \mathbf{Y}_p - G(\textbf{Z}_{p\rightarrow p})\|_1 \label{eq:joint} \\
    \mathcal{L}_{rec} &= \mathbb{E}_{\mathbf{Y}_p, \textbf{X}_a}\| \mathbf{Y}_p - G(\textbf{Z}_{a\rightarrow p})\|_1 \label{eq:reg}
\end{align}
```

## Style Embedding

We represent style as a collection of embeddings $`S(i) \in \textbf{S} \sim F_s`$, where $`S(i)`$ is the style of the $`i^{th}`$ speaker in the style matrix $`\textbf{S}`$. Style space and embeddings are conceptually similar to the GST (Global Style Token) layer which decomposes the audio embedding space into a set of basis vectors or style tokens, but only one out of the two modalities in the stylized audio generation task have both style and content. In our case, both audio and pose have style and content. To ensure that generator $`G`$ is attending only to style of pose while ignoring style of the audio, a style consistency loss is enforced on input $`\textbf{Y}_p`$ and generated $`\hat{\textbf{Y}}_p`$.

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{id} = \mathbb{E}_{Y \in \lbrace\textbf{Y}_p, \hat{\textbf{Y}}_p\rbrace}\mbox{CCE}\left(\mbox{Softmax}\left(E^s_p(Y)\right), \textbf{ID}\right) \label{eq:style}
\end{equation}
```

where $`\textbf{ID}`$ is a one-hot vector denoting the speaker level style.

## Total Loss with Adversarial Training

To alleviate the challenge of overly smooth generation caused by L1 reconstruction and joint losses in Equation <a href="#eq:joint" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:joint">[eq:joint]</a>,<a href="#eq:reg" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:reg">[eq:reg]</a>, we use the generated pose sequence $`\mathbf{\hat{Y}}^p`$ as a signal for the adversarial discriminator $`D`$ . The discriminator tries to classify the true pose $`\mathbf{Y}^p`$ from the generated pose $`\mathbf{\hat{Y}}^p`$, while the generator learns to fool the discriminator by generating realistic poses. This adversarial loss is written as:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{adv} = \mathbb{E}_{\mathbf{Y}_p}\log D\left(\mathbf{Y}_p) + \mathbb{E}_{\textbf{X}_a, \textbf{Y}_p}\log\left(1- D(G\left(\left[E^c_a(\textbf{X}_a), E^s_p(\textbf{X}_p)\right]\right)\right)\right) \label{eq:adv}
\end{equation}
```

The model is jointly trained to optimize the overall loss function:

```math
\begin{equation}
    \max_{D} \min_{E^c_a, E^c_p, E^s_p, G} \mathcal{L}_{mix} + \mathcal{L}_{joint} + \mathcal{L}_{rec} + \lambda_{id}\mathcal{L}_{id} + \mathcal{L}_{adv}
\end{equation}
```

where $`\lambda_{id}`$ controls the weight of the style consistency loss term.

## Network Architectures

Our proposed approach can work with any temporal network, giving it the flexibility of incorporating domain dependent or pre-trained temporal models.

In our experiments we use a Temporal Convolution Network (TCN) module for both content and style encoders. The style space is a matrix $`\mathbf{S}\in \mathbb{R}^{N \times D}`$ where $`N`$ is the number of speakers and $`D`$ is the length of the style embeddings. The generator $`G(.)`$ consists of a 1D version of U-Net followed by $`M`$ TCNs as sub-generator functions. The discriminator is also a TCN module with lower capacity than the generators. A more detailed architecture can be found in the supplementary.

## References

1. Ahuja, C., Ma, S., Morency, L.P., Sheikh, Y.: To react or not to react:
   End-to-end visual pose forecasting for personalized avatar during dyadic
   conversations. In: 2019 International Conference on Multimodal Interaction.
   pp. 74--84. ACM (2019)
2. Ahuja, C., Morency, L.P.: Language2pose: Natural language grounded pose
   forecasting. In: 2019 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). pp.
   719--728. IEEE (2019)
3. Andriluka, M., Pishchulin, L., Gehler, P., Schiele, B.: 2d human pose
   estimation: New benchmark and state of the art analysis. In: Proceedings of
   the IEEE Conference on computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp.
   3686--3693 (2014)
4. Arjovsky, M., Chintala, S., Bottou, L.: Wasserstein gan. arXiv preprint
   arXiv:1701.07875 (2017) [arXiv:1701.07875](https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.07875)
5. Arora, S., Ge, R., Liang, Y., Ma, T., Zhang, Y.: Generalization and equilibrium
   in generative adversarial nets (gans). In: Proceedings of the 34th
   International Conference on Machine Learning-Volume 70. pp. 224--232. JMLR.
   org (2017)
6. Bailenson, J.N., Yee, N., Merget, D., Schroeder, R.: The effect of behavioral
   realism and form realism of real-time avatar faces on verbal disclosure,
   nonverbal disclosure, emotion recognition, and copresence in dyadic
   interaction. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments
   \textbf{15}(4), 359--372 (2006)
7. Bansal, A., Ma, S., Ramanan, D., Sheikh, Y.: Recycle-gan: Unsupervised video
   retargeting. In: Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
   (ECCV). pp. 119--135 (2018)
8. Bergmann, K., Kopp, S.: {Increasing the expressiveness of virtual agents:
   autonomous generation of speech and gesture for spatial description tasks}.
   In: Proceedings of The 8th International Conference on Autonomous Agents and
   Multiagent Systems-Volume 1. pp. 361--368 (2009)
9. Bian, Y., Chen, C., Kang, Y., Pan, Z.: Multi-reference tacotron by intercross
   training for style disentangling, transfer and control in speech synthesis.
   arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.02373 (2019) [arXiv:1904.02373](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.02373)
10. Cao, Z., Hidalgo, G., Simon, T., Wei, S.E., Sheikh, Y.: Openpose: realtime
    multi-person 2d pose estimation using part affinity fields. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1812.08008 (2018) [arXiv:1812.08008](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.08008)
11. Cassell, J., Vilhj{\'a}lmsson, H.H., Bickmore, T.: Beat: the behavior
    expression animation toolkit. In: Life-Like Characters, pp. 163--185.
    Springer (2004)
12. Chiu, C.C., Marsella, S.: {Gesture generation with low-dimensional embeddings}.
    In: Proceedings of the 2014 international conference on Autonomous agents and
    multi-agent systems. pp. 781--788 (2014)
13. Chiu, C.C., Morency, L.P., Marsella, S.: {Predicting co-verbal gestures: A deep
    and temporal modeling approach}. In: Proceedings of the 15th international
    conference on Intelligent virtual agents (IVA2015). vol.~9238, pp. 152--166
    (2015)
14. Davis, R.O., Vincent, J.: Sometimes more is better: Agent gestures, procedural
    knowledge and the foreign language learner. British Journal of Educational
    Technology \textbf{50}(6), 3252--3263 (2019)
15. Denton, E.L., et~al.: Unsupervised learning of disentangled representations
    from video. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. pp.
    4414--4423 (2017)
16. Ferstl, Y., Neff, M., McDonnell, R.: Multi-objective adversarial gesture
    generation. In: Motion, Interaction and Games. p.~3. ACM (2019)
17. Gatys, L.A., Ecker, A.S., Bethge, M.: A neural algorithm of artistic style.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:1508.06576 (2015) [arXiv:1508.06576](https://arxiv.org/abs/1508.06576)
18. Ginosar, S., Bar, A., Kohavi, G., Chan, C., Owens, A., Malik, J.: Learning
    individual styles of conversational gesture. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
    Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 3497--3506 (2019)
19. Goodfellow, I., Pouget-Abadie, J., Mirza, M., Xu, B., Warde-Farley, D., Ozair,
    S., Courville, A., Bengio, Y.: Generative adversarial nets. In: Advances in
    neural information processing systems. pp. 2672--2680 (2014)
20. Gurunath, N., Rallabandi, S.K., Black, A.: Disentangling speech and non-speech
    components for building robust acoustic models from found data. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:1909.11727 (2019) [arXiv:1909.11727](https://arxiv.org/abs/1909.11727)
21. Hao, G.Y., Yu, H.X., Zheng, W.S.: Mixgan: learning concepts from different
    domains for mixture generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1807.01659 (2018) [arXiv:1807.01659](https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.01659)
22. Hasegawa, D., Kaneko, N., Shirakawa, S., Sakuta, H., Sumi, K.: {Evaluation of
    Speech-to-Gesture Generation Using Bi-Directional LSTM Network}. In:
    Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Intelligent Virtual
    Agents (IVA18). pp. 79--86 (2018)
23. Hoang, Q., Nguyen, T.D., Le, T., Phung, D.: Mgan: Training generative
    adversarial nets with multiple generators (2018)
24. Huang, X., Liu, M.Y., Belongie, S., Kautz, J.: Multimodal unsupervised
    image-to-image translation. In: Proceedings of the European Conference on
    Computer Vision (ECCV). pp. 172--189 (2018)
25. Isola, P., Zhu, J.Y., Zhou, T., Efros, A.A.: Image-to-image translation with
    conditional adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
    computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 1125--1134 (2017)
26. Johnson, J., Alahi, A., Fei-Fei, L.: Perceptual losses for real-time style
    transfer and super-resolution. In: European conference on computer vision.
    pp. 694--711. Springer (2016)
27. Kendon, A.: {Gesture and speech: two aspects of the process of utterance}. In:
    {M. R. Key} (ed.) Nonverbal Communication and Language, pp. 207--227 (1980)
28. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
    preprint arXiv:1412.6980 (2014) [arXiv:1412.6980](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980)
29. Kucherenko, T., Hasegawa, D., Henter, G.E., Kaneko, N., Kjellstr{\"o}m, H.:
    Analyzing input and output representations for speech-driven gesture
    generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03369 (2019) [arXiv:1903.03369](https://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03369)
30. Lee, H.Y., Tseng, H.Y., Mao, Q., Huang, J.B., Lu, Y.D., Singh, M., Yang, M.H.:
    Drit++: Diverse image-to-image translation via disentangled representations.
    arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.01270 (2019) [arXiv:1905.01270](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.01270)
31. Lee, H.Y., Yang, X., Liu, M.Y., Wang, T.C., Lu, Y.D., Yang, M.H., Kautz, J.:
    Dancing to music. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. pp.
    3581--3591 (2019)
32. Levine, S., Kr\"{a}henb\"{u}hl, P., Thrun, S., Koltun, V.: Gesture controllers.
    ACM Trans. Graph. \textbf{29}(4), 124:1--124:11 (Jul 2010)
33. Levine, S., Theobalt, C., Koltun, V.: Real-time prosody-driven synthesis of
    body language. ACM Trans. Graph. \textbf{28}(5), 172:1--172:10 (Dec 2009)
34. Liu, M.Y., Breuel, T., Kautz, J.: Unsupervised image-to-image translation
    networks. In: Advances in neural information processing systems. pp. 700--708
    (2017)
35. Liu, M.Y., Tuzel, O.: Coupled generative adversarial networks. In: Advances in
    neural information processing systems. pp. 469--477 (2016)
36. Lloyd, S.: Least squares quantization in pcm. IEEE transactions on information
    theory \textbf{28}(2), 129--137 (1982)
37. Ma, S., Mcduff, D., Song, Y.: Neural tts stylization with adversarial and
    collaborative games (2018)
38. Maaten, L.v.d., Hinton, G.: Visualizing data using t-sne. Journal of machine
    learning research \textbf{9}(Nov), 2579--2605 (2008)
39. McNeill, D.: {Hand and mind: What gestures reveal about thought}. University of
    Chicago Press (1992)
40. Nagrani, A., Chung, J.S., Albanie, S., Zisserman, A.: Disentangled speech
    embeddings using cross-modal self-supervision. In: ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE
    International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
    pp. 6829--6833. IEEE (2020)
41. Neff, M., Kipp, M., Albrecht, I., Seidel, H.P.: Gesture modeling and animation
    based on a probabilistic re-creation of speaker style. ACM Transactions on
    Graphics (TOG) \textbf{27}(1), 1--24 (2008)
42. Obermeier, C., Kelly, S.D., Gunter, T.C.: A speaker’s gesture style can
    affect language comprehension: Erp evidence from gesture-speech integration.
    Social cognitive and affective neuroscience \textbf{10}(9), 1236--1243
    (2015)
43. Pelachaud, C.: Studies on gesture expressivity for a virtual agent. Speech
    Communication \textbf{51}(7), 630--639 (2009)
44. Reynolds, D.A.: Gaussian mixture models. Encyclopedia of biometrics
    \textbf{741} (2009)
45. Ronneberger, O., Fischer, P., Brox, T.: U-net: Convolutional networks for
    biomedical image segmentation. In: International Conference on Medical image
    computing and computer-assisted intervention. pp. 234--241. Springer (2015)
46. Rosca, M., Lakshminarayanan, B., Warde-Farley, D., Mohamed, S.: Variational
    approaches for auto-encoding generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1706.04987 (2017) [arXiv:1706.04987](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.04987)
47. Royer, A., Bousmalis, K., Gouws, S., Bertsch, F., Mosseri, I., Cole, F.,
    Murphy, K.: Xgan: Unsupervised image-to-image translation for many-to-many
    mappings. In: Domain Adaptation for Visual Understanding, pp. 33--49.
    Springer (2020)
48. Sadoughi, N., Busso, C.: Novel realizations of speech-driven head movements
    with generative adversarial networks. pp. 6169--6173 (04 2018).
    \doi{10.1109/ICASSP.2018.8461967}
49. Salimans, T., Goodfellow, I., Zaremba, W., Cheung, V., Radford, A., Chen, X.:
    Improved techniques for training gans. In: Advances in neural information
    processing systems. pp. 2234--2242 (2016)
50. Sargin, M.E., Yemez, Y., Erzin, E., Tekalp, A.M.: {Analysis of head gesture and
    prosody patterns for prosody-driven head-gesture animation}. IEEE Trans.
    Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. \textbf{30}, 1330--1345 (2008).
    \doi{10.1109/TPAMI.2007.70797}
51. Shlizerman, E., Dery, L., Schoen, H., Kemelmacher, I.: Audio to body dynamics.
    Proceedings / CVPR, IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
    Pattern Recognition. IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and
    Pattern Recognition (06 2018)
52. Simon, T., Joo, H., Matthews, I., Sheikh, Y.: Hand keypoint detection in single
    images using multiview bootstrapping. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference
    on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1145--1153 (2017)
53. Smith, H.J., Cao, C., Neff, M., Wang, Y.: Efficient neural networks for
    real-time motion style transfer. Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics
    and Interactive Techniques \textbf{2}(2), 1--17 (2019)
54. Szegedy, C., Vanhoucke, V., Ioffe, S., Shlens, J., Wojna, Z.: Rethinking the
    inception architecture for computer vision. In: Proceedings of the IEEE
    conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 2818--2826 (2016)
55. Villegas, R., Yang, J., Hong, S., Lin, X., Lee, H.: Decomposing motion and
    content for natural video sequence prediction. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1706.08033 (2017) [arXiv:1706.08033](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08033)
56. Wagner, P., Malisz, Z., Kopp, S.: Gesture and speech in interaction: An
    overview (2014)
57. Wang, Y., Stanton, D., Zhang, Y., Skerry-Ryan, R., Battenberg, E., Shor, J.,
    Xiao, Y., Ren, F., Jia, Y., Saurous, R.A.: Style tokens: Unsupervised style
    modeling, control and transfer in end-to-end speech synthesis. arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1803.09017 (2018) [arXiv:1803.09017](https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.09017)
58. Xu, J., Gannon, P.J., Emmorey, K., Smith, J.F., Braun, A.R.: Symbolic gestures
    and spoken language are processed by a common neural system. Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences \textbf{106}(49), 20664--20669 (2009)
59. Zhu, J.Y., Park, T., Isola, P., Efros, A.A.: Unpaired image-to-image
    translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of
    the IEEE international conference on computer vision. pp. 2223--2232 (2017)
60. Zhu, J.Y., Zhang, R., Pathak, D., Darrell, T., Efros, A.A., Wang, O.,
    Shechtman, E.: Toward multimodal image-to-image translation. In: Advances in
    neural information processing systems. pp. 465--476 (2017)
