---
arxiv_id: '2104.03117'
title: Single Source One Shot Reenactment using Weighted motion From Paired Feature
  Points
authors:
- Soumya Tripathy
- Juho Kannala
- Esa Rahtu
submitted: '2021-04-07'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03117
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/31
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:27:14+00:00'
references_parsed: 31
arxiv_version: ''
---



## References

1. A.~Siarohin, S.~Lathuilière, S.~Tulyakov, E.~Ricci, and N.~Sebe, ``First order
  motion model for image animation,'' in \emph{Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, December 2019.
2. S.~Ha, M.~Kersner, B.~Kim, S.~Seo, and D.~Kim, ``Marionette: Few-shot face
  reenactment preserving identity of unseen targets,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence}, 2020.
3. E.~Zakharov, A.~Shysheya, E.~Burkov, and V.~Lempitsky, ``Few-shot adversarial
  learning of realistic neural talking head models,'' in \emph{Proceedings of
  the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, 2019, pp.
  9459--9468.
4. E.~Burkov, I.~Pasechnik, A.~Grigorev, and V.~Lempitsky, ``Neural {{Head
  Reenactment}} with {{Latent Pose Descriptors}},'' \emph{2020 IEEE/CVF
  Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pp.
  13\,783--13\,792, June 2020.
5. G.~Yao, Y.~Yuan, T.~Shao, and K.~Zhou, ``Mesh guided one-shot face reenactment
  using graph convolutional networks,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the 28th ACM
  International Conference on Multimedia}, 2020, pp. 1773--1781.
6. S.~Tripathy, J.~Kannala, and E.~Rahtu, ``Facegan: Facial attribute controllable
  reenactment gan,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
  Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)}, January 2021, pp. 1329--1338.
7. Y.~Nirkin, Y.~Keller, and T.~Hassner, ``{FSGAN}: Subject agnostic face swapping
  and reenactment,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
  on Computer Vision}, 2019, pp. 7184--7193.
8. O.~Wiles, A.~S. Koepke, and A.~Zisserman, ``\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{{{X2Face}}:
  {{A Network}} for {{Controlling Face Generation Using Images}}, {{Audio}},
  and {{Pose Codes}}},'' in \emph{\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{Computer {{Vision}}
  \textendash{} {{ECCV}} 2018}}, V.~Ferrari, M.~Hebert, C.~Sminchisescu, and
  Y.~Weiss, Eds.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax {Cham}: {Springer
  International Publishing}, 2018, vol. 11217, pp. 690--706.
9. E.~Zakharov, A.~Ivakhnenko, A.~Shysheya, and V.~Lempitsky, ``Fast bi-layer
  neural synthesis of one-shot realistic head avatars,'' in \emph{European
  Conference on Computer Vision}.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax
  Springer, 2020, pp. 524--540.
10. S.~Tripathy, J.~Kannala, and E.~Rahtu, ``Icface: Interpretable and controllable
  face reenactment using gans,'' in \emph{The IEEE Winter Conference on
  Applications of Computer Vision}, 2020, pp. 3385--3394.
11. J.~Thies, M.~Zollhofer, M.~Stamminger, C.~Theobalt, and M.~Niessner,
  ``Face2face: Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}, June 2016.
12. P.~Ekman and W.~V. Friesen, ``\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{Facial action coding
  system: A technique for the measurement of facial movement},''
  https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/Facial-action-coding-system\%3A-a-technique-for-the-of-Ekman-Friesen/1566cf20e2ba91ca8857c30083419bf7c127094b,
  1978.
13. A.~Siarohin, S.~Lathuili{\`e}re, S.~Tulyakov, E.~Ricci, and N.~Sebe,
  ``Animating arbitrary objects via deep motion transfer,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition}, 2019, pp. 2377--2386.
14. W.~Wu, Y.~Zhang, C.~Li, C.~Qian, and C.~Change~Loy, ``Reenactgan: Learning to
  reenact faces via boundary transfer,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the European
  conference on computer vision (ECCV)}, 2018, pp. 603--619.
15. S.~Schaefer, T.~McPhail, and J.~Warren, ``Image deformation using moving least
  squares,'' in \emph{ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers}, 2006, pp. 533--540.
16. T.-C. Wang, M.-Y. Liu, J.-Y. Zhu, A.~Tao, J.~Kautz, and B.~Catanzaro,
  ``High-resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional
  gans,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, 2018, pp. 8798--8807.
17. T.-C. Wang, M.-Y. Liu, A.~Tao, G.~Liu, J.~Kautz, and B.~Catanzaro, ``Few-shot
  video-to-video synthesis,'' in \emph{Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems (NeurIPS)}, 2019.
18. S.~Suwajanakorn, S.~M. Seitz, and I.~{Kemelmacher-Shlizerman}, ``Synthesizing
  {{Obama}}: Learning lip sync from audio,'' \emph{ACM Trans. Graph.}, vol.~36,
  no.~4, pp. 95:1--95:13, July 2017.
19. J.~Zhang, X.~Zeng, M.~Wang, Y.~Pan, L.~Liu, Y.~Liu, Y.~Ding, and C.~Fan,
  ``Freenet: Multi-identity face reenactment,'' in \emph{CVPR}, 2020, pp.
  5326--5335.
20. A.~Pumarola, A.~Agudo, A.~M. Martinez, A.~Sanfeliu, and F.~Moreno-Noguer,
  ``Ganimation: Anatomically-aware facial animation from a single image,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV)},
  2018, pp. 818--833.
21. T.~Jakab, A.~Gupta, H.~Bilen, and A.~Vedaldi,
  ``\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{Unsupervised {{Learning}} of {{Object Landmarks}}
  through {{Conditional Image Generation}}},'' p.~12.
22. V.~Blanz and T.~Vetter, ``\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{A morphable model for the
  synthesis of {{3D}} faces},'' in \emph{\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{Proceedings of
  the 26th Annual Conference on {{Computer}} Graphics and Interactive
  Techniques - {{SIGGRAPH}} '99}}.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax {Not
  Known}: {ACM Press}, 1999, pp. 187--194.
23. H.~Kim, P.~Garrido, A.~Tewari, W.~Xu, J.~Thies, M.~Niessner, P.~P{\'e}rez,
  C.~Richardt, M.~Zollh{\"o}fer, and C.~Theobalt, ``Deep video portraits,''
  \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, vol.~37, no.~4, pp. 1--14, 2018.
24. Y.~Nirkin, I.~Masi, A.~T. Tuan, T.~Hassner, and G.~Medioni, ``On face
  segmentation, face swapping, and face perception,'' in \emph{2018 13th IEEE
  International Conference on Automatic Face \& Gesture Recognition (FG
  2018)}.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax IEEE, 2018, pp. 98--105.
25. A.~Vaswani, N.~Shazeer, N.~Parmar, J.~Uszkoreit, L.~Jones, A.~N. Gomez,
  u.~Kaiser, and I.~Polosukhin, ``Attention is all you need,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information
  Processing Systems}, ser. NIPS'17.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax Red
  Hook, NY, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2017, p. 6000–6010.
26. Y.~Wang and J.~M. Solomon, ``Deep closest point: Learning representations for
  point cloud registration,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
  International Conference on Computer Vision}, 2019, pp. 3523--3532.
27. A.~Nagrani, J.~S. Chung, and A.~Zisserman,
  ``\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{{{VoxCeleb}}: {{A Large}}-{{Scale Speaker
  Identification Dataset}}},'' in \emph{\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{Interspeech
  2017}}.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax {ISCA}, Aug. 2017, pp.
  2616--2620.
28. A.~Rossler, D.~Cozzolino, L.~Verdoliva, C.~Riess, J.~Thies, and M.~Nie{\ss}ner,
  ``Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images,'' in
  \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision},
  2019, pp. 1--11.
29. J.~Deng, J.~Guo, N.~Xue, and S.~Zafeiriou,
  ``\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{{{ArcFace}}: {{Additive Angular Margin Loss}} for
  {{Deep Face Recognition}}},'' in \emph{\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{2019
  {{IEEE}}/{{CVF Conference}} on {{Computer Vision}} and {{Pattern
  Recognition}} ({{CVPR}})}}.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax {Long
  Beach, CA, USA}: {IEEE}, June 2019, pp. 4685--4694.
30. T.~Baltrusaitis, A.~Zadeh, Y.~C. Lim, and L.-P. Morency, ``Openface 2.0:
  {{Facial}} behavior analysis toolkit,'' in \emph{2018 13th {{IEEE
  International Conference}} on {{Automatic Face}} \& {{Gesture Recognition}}
  ({{FG}} 2018)}.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus 0.4em\relax {IEEE}, 2018, pp.
  59--66.
31. Y.~Li, J.~Zeng, S.~Shan, and X.~Chen,
  ``\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{Self-{{Supervised Representation Learning From
  Videos}} for {{Facial Action Unit Detection}}},'' in
  \emph{\BIBforeignlanguage{en}{2019 {{IEEE}}/{{CVF Conference}} on {{Computer
  Vision}} and {{Pattern Recognition}} ({{CVPR}})}}.\hskip 1em plus 0.5em minus
  0.4em\relax {Long Beach, CA, USA}: {IEEE}, June 2019, pp. 10\,916--10\,925.
