---
arxiv_id: '2601.00664'
title: 'Avatar Forcing: Real-Time Interactive Head Avatar Generation for Natural Conversation'
authors:
- Taekyung Ki
- Sangwon Jang
- Jaehyeong Jo
- Jaehong Yoon
- Sung Ju Hwang
submitted: '2026-01-02'
categories:
- cs.LG
- cs.AI
- cs.CV
- cs.HC
- cs.MM
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.00664
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 57/178
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:11:28+00:00'
references_parsed: 178
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Talking head generation animates static portrait images into lifelike avatars that can speak like humans. These systems are increasingly used to create virtual presenters, hosts, and educators that can substitute for real human presence in many scenarios. They also support customized avatars that users can interact with, for instance, chatting with their favorite characters , offering a practical tool for content creation and visual communication.

However, existing avatar generation models fail to fully replicate the feeling of real face-to-face interaction. They primarily focus on generating audio-synchronized lip or natural head motions  to deliver information accurately and naturally, rather than engaging in interactive conversations. Such one-way interaction overlooks the bidirectional nature of real-life conversations, where the continuous exchange of verbal and non-verbal signals plays a crucial role in communication. For instance, active listening behaviors such as nodding or empathic responses encourage the speaker to continue, while expressive speaking behaviors such as smiling or making eye contact contribute to a more realistic and immersive conversation.

We identify two major challenges in generating truly interactive avatars. The first challenge is the real-time processing of users’ multimodal inputs. An interactive avatar system must continuously receive and respond to the user’s multimodal cues, such as speech, head motion, and facial expression, which requires both low inference time and minimal latency. Existing methods  achieve fast inference within a motion latent space  but have high latency because they need the full conversation context (e.g., over 3 seconds), including future frames. The model must wait for a sufficiently long audio segment before generating motion, causing a notable delay in user interaction, as illustrated in <a href="#fig:blockwise_causal_dit" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:blockwise_causal_dit">3</a>. This highlights the need for a causal motion generation framework that reacts immediately to live inputs.

The second challenge is learning expressive and vibrant interactive motion. Expressiveness in human interactions is inherently difficult to define or annotate, and the lack of well-curated data makes the natural interactive behaviors hard to model. For listening behaviors in particular, we observe that most of the training data are less expressive and low-variant, often exhibiting stiff posture (See <a href="#fig:vis_speaker_listener_exp" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:vis_speaker_listener_exp">5</a>). Moreover, unlike lip synchronization, which is strongly tied with the avatar audio and therefore relatively easy to learn, reacting appropriately to user cues can correspond to a wide range of plausible motions. This ambiguity greatly increases learning difficulty, often resulting in less diverse, stiff motions, particularly in response to non-verbal cues.

To address these challenges, we present a new interactive head avatar generation framework, **Avatar Forcing**, which models the causal interaction between the user and the avatar in a learned motion latent space . Inspired by recent diffusion-forcing-based interactive video generative models , we employ *causal diffusion forcing*  to generate interactive head motion latents while continuously processing multimodal user inputs in real-time. Unlike the previous approach  that requires the future conversation context (See <a href="#fig:blockwise_causal_dit" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:blockwise_causal_dit">3</a>), Avatar Forcing causally generates interactive avatar videos by efficiently reusing past information through key-value (KV) caching. This design enables real-time reactive avatar generation with minimal latency.

Moreover, following the learning-from-losing paradigm of preference optimization methods , we propose a preference optimization method to enhance the interactiveness of the avatar motion. By synthesizing under-expressive motion latents via dropping the user signals and using them as less-preferred samples, we achieve significantly improved expressiveness and reactiveness, without the need for additional human annotations for natural interaction. As a result, Avatar Forcing can produce more natural and engaging interactive videos as illustrated in <a href="#fig:concept" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:concept">[fig:concept]</a>.

Extensive experiments demonstrate that Avatar Forcing supports real-time interaction with a latency of roughly 500ms. Moreover, the proposed preference optimization significantly improves motion reactiveness and richness, producing more natural and engaging videos. In human evaluations, our method is preferred over 80% against the strongest baseline, demonstrating clear advantages in naturalness, responsiveness, and overall interaction quality.

# Related Works

## Talking Avatar Generation

Talking avatar generation aims to generate a lifelike talking avatar video from a given reference image and an audio. Earlier methods in this field had focused on synthesizing accurate lip movement from the driving audio . These approaches are extended to generate holistic head movements, including a rhythmical head motion  and vivid facial expressions, such as eye blink and jaw movement . SadTalker , for instance, leverages 3D morphable models (3DMM)  as an intermediate representation for the non-verbal facial expression. EMO  and its subsequent models  leverage the foundation image diffusion model (e.g., StableDiffusion ) for photorealistic portrait animation. Recent works  introduce generative modeling techniques, such as diffusion models or flow matching into a learned motion space , achieving real-time head motion generation.

## Listening Avatar Generation

Another line of works  focus on generating realistic listening head motions, such as nodding or focusing. Generating such responsive motions is challenging because the relationship between the speaker and listener is inherently one-to-many , and the cues are context-dependent and weakly supervised. Hence, most of the works generate the *personalized* listening motion  or leverage explicit control signals, such as *text instruction*  and *pose prior* .

## Dyadic Conversational Avatar Generation

Recently, several studies investigated dyadic motion generation , which involves modeling the interactive behavior of two participants engaged in a conversational setting. DIM  quantizes dyadic motions into two discrete latent spaces , one for the verbal and one for the non-verbal. However, it requires a manual role-switching signal between the two spaces, resulting in discontinuous transitions between speaker and listener states. INFP  addresses this limitation by introducing audio-conditioned verbal and non-verbal memory banks within a unified motion generator. However, this is ill-suited for real-time interactive generation as its bidirectional transformer  requires access to the entire context of the conversation. ARIG  generates implicit 3D keypoints  as its motion representation, primarily focusing on facial expressions. Yet it struggles with temporal consistency and fails to produce holistic head motions.

In this work, we focus on modeling the interactive behavior of both participants continuously influencing each other through verbal and non-verbal signals. We generate holistic interactive motions, for instance, talking, head movement, listening, and focusing, using a diffusion forcing framework that promptly responds to the multimodal user signals.

# Background

#### Diffusion Forcing

Diffusion forcing  stands out as an efficient sequential generative model that predicts *next token* conditioned on *the noisy past tokens*. Let $`\mathbf{x}_1 = (x_1^{1}, x_1^2, \cdots, x_1^{N}) \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times 3 \times H \times W}`$ denote a sequence of $`N`$ tokens sampled from data distribution $`p_1`$. Each token is corrupted with per-token independent noise levels $`\boldsymbol{t}\coloneqq (t_1, t_2, \cdots, t_N) \in [0, 1]^{N}`$, forming an independently noised sequence $`\mathbf{x}_{\mathbf{t}} \coloneqq (x^1_{t_1}, x^2_{t_2}, \cdots, x^N_{t_N})`$, where $`x^{n}_{t_n} = t_n x_1^{n} + (1-t_n)x_0^n`$ and $`\mathbf{x}_0 = (x_0^{n})_{n=1}^{N}\sim p_0`$. Here, we follow the noise scheduler of flow matching . The training objective of diffusion forcing is to regress the vector field $`v_\theta`$ toward the target vector field $`v^n_{t_n} = x^n_1-x^n_0`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathcal{L}_{DF}(\theta)  = \mathbb{E}_{n, t_n, x^n_{t_n}} \left[ \| v_{\theta}(x^n_{t_n}, t_n) -  v^n_{t_n}\| \right]. \label{eq:train_df}
\end{equation}
```

Diffusion forcing reformulates conventional teacher forcing in terms of diffusion models, allowing causal sequence generation with diffusion guidance  for controllable generation and flexible sampling procedure.

#### Direct Preference Optimization

Direct Preference Optimization (DPO)  aligns a model with human preferences without explicitly training a reward model. The training objective $`\mathcal{L}_{DPO}`$ is formulated as follows:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    - \mathbb{E}_{c, x^w, x^l} \left[ \log \sigma \left( \beta \frac{\pi_{\theta} (x^w | c) }{\pi_{\text{ref}}(x^w | c)}  - \beta \frac{\pi_{\theta}(x^l | c)}{\pi_{\text{ref}}(x^l | c) } \right)\right], \label{eq:dpo}
\end{equation}
```
where $`c`$ is the condition, $`x^w`$ and $`x^l`$ denote *preferred* and *less preferred* samples, respectively, and $`\pi_{\text{ref}}`$ is a frozen reference model during the optimization, typically initialized by the pre-trained weight of $`\pi_\theta`$. Here, $`\sigma(\cdot)`$ is the sigmoid function, and $`\beta`$ is the deviation parameter. DiffusionDPO  extends DPO to diffusion models by reformulating the objective with diffusion likelihoods, enabling preference optimization using the evidence lower bound.

# Avatar Forcing

In this work, we present Avatar Forcing, which generates a video of a real-time interactive head avatar, conditioned on the avatar audio and the multimodal signals of the user. We provide an overview of our framework in <a href="#fig:architecture1" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:architecture1">1</a>.

In <a href="#sec:df_motion_sample" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:df_motion_sample">4.1</a>, we present our framework for achieving real-time interactive head avatar generation based on causal diffusion forcing in the motion latent space. This consists of two key steps: encoding multimodal user and avatar signals, and causal inference of avatar motion. In <a href="#sec:dpo" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:dpo">4.2</a>, we introduce a preference optimization method for the interactive motion generation, which enhances expressive interaction without the need for additional human labels.

<figure id="fig:architecture1" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/architecture1-4.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Overall architecture of Avatar Forcing</strong>. We encode the use motion and audio, as well as avatar audio into a unified condition by Dual Motion Encoder. Causal Motion Generator infer the motion latent block of the avatar, which are then decoded into an avatar video.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:architecture2" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/architecture2-2.pdf" style="width:49.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Architecture of</strong> <span class="math inline"><em>v</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub></span>. The look-ahead causal attention mask enables a smooth transition across the blocks.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Diffusion Forcing for Real-Time Interaction

#### Motion Latent Encoding

For motion encoding, we employ the motion latent auto-encoder from . The latent auto-encoder maps an input image $`S\in\mathbb{R}^{3 \times\! H \!\times\! W}`$ to a latent $`z \in \mathbb{R}^d`$ whose identity and motion are decomposable:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    z = z_{S} + \mathbf{m}_S \in \mathbb{R}^d,
\end{equation}
```
where $`z_{S}\in\mathbb{R}^d`$ and $`\mathbf{m}_S\in\mathbb{R}^d`$ are the identity and motion latents, respectively. The identity latent $`z_S`$ encodes identity representation of the avatar image $`S`$ (e.g., appearance), while the motion latent $`\mathbf{m}_S`$ encodes rich verbal and non-verbal features (e.g., facial expression, head motion). We use this latent representation to capture holistic head motion and fine-grained facial expression, which are crucial for realistic head avatar generation. We provide more details on the auto-encoder in Appendix <span style="color: red">B</span>.

#### Interactive Motion Generation

In Avatar Forcing, the motion latents are generated by conditioning on multimodal user signals and avatar audio. This can be formulated as an autoregressive model as follows:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \vspace*{-1mm}
    p_{\theta}( \mathbf{m}^{1:N}) = \prod_{i=1}^{N} p_{\theta}(\mathbf{m}^i | \mathbf{m}^{<i}, \mathbf{c}^{\leq i}), \label{eq:task}
    \vspace*{-1mm}
\end{equation}
```
where each motion latent $`\mathbf{m}^i`$ is predicted from past motion latents and the condition triplet $`\mathbf{c}^{i} = (\mathbf{a}_u^{i}, \mathbf{m}_u^i, \mathbf{a}^i)`$ consisting of user audio $`\mathbf{a}_u^{i}`$, user motion $`\mathbf{m}_u^i`$, and avatar audio $`\mathbf{a}^i`$.

Based on this formulation, we introduce a diffusion forcing-based causal motion generator operating in the motion latent space, which is modeled using a vector field model $`v_\theta`$. As illustrated in <a href="#fig:architecture2" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:architecture2">2</a>, the model $`v_\theta`$ comprises two main components: *Dual Motion Encoder* and *Causal DFoT Motion Generation*.

The goal of the Dual Motion Encoder is to capture the bidirectional relationship between multimodal user signals and avatar audio, and to encode them into a unified condition. As illustrated in <a href="#fig:architecture2" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:architecture2">2</a>(a), the encoder first takes the user signals ($`\mathbf{m}^{i}_u`$ and $`\mathbf{a}^{i}_u`$) and aligns them through a cross-attention layer, which captures the holistic user motion. This representation is then integrated with the avatar audio using another cross-attention layer, which learns the causal relation between the user and the avatar, producing a unified user-avatar-condition. In <a href="#sec:experiments:ablation" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:experiments:ablation">5.5</a>, we empirically validate the importance of using user motion $`\mathbf{m}^{i}_u`$ for generating an interactive avatar.

For the causal motion generator, we adopt the diffusion forcing transformer (DFoT)  with a *blockwise causal structure* . The latent frames are divided into blocks to capture local bidirectional dependencies within each block while maintaining causal dependencies across different blocks. For each block, we assign a shared noise timestep to all frames and apply an attention mask that prevents the current block from attending to any future blocks.

In <a href="#fig:blockwise_causal_dit" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:blockwise_causal_dit">3</a>, we compare our motion generator architecture with the standard bidirectional DiT architecture used in INFP . Unlike INFP, which requires the full temporal context, our diffusion forcing allows stepwise motion generation under causal constraints and user-avatar interaction with low latency.

<figure id="fig:blockwise_causal_dit" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/cache4.pdf" style="width:48.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Architectural comparison between bidirectional and causal structure</strong>. (a) Bidirectional DiT used in INFP <span class="citation" data-cites="infp"></span> requires access to the entire temporal window for motion generation. (b) Our blockwise causal DFoT predicts the next block without using future context and supports KV caching. </figcaption>
</figure>

However, we observe that the strict causal mask in the blockwise causal attention fails to ensure a smooth temporal transition across blocks. To address this issue, we introduce *look-ahead* in the causal mask, which allows each block to attend to a limited number of future frames while preserving overall causality. We define this blockwise look-ahead causal mask $`M`$ as follows (illustrated in <a href="#fig:architecture2" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:architecture2">2</a>(b), right):
``` math
\begin{align}
    M_{i,j} = 1 ~~\text{if}~~ \lfloor j / B \rfloor \leq \lfloor i / B \rfloor + l ~~\text{else}~~ 0, \label{eq:lookahead_mask}
\end{align}
```
where $`i`$ and $`j`$ are the frame indices, $`B`$ denotes the block size, and $`l`$ is the look-ahead frame size. With look-ahead, we effectively mitigate severe per-frame motion jittering observed in the simple blockwise causal structure, which we provide video examples in the supplementary materials.

Based on the blockwise causal structure, the motion generator takes a noisy latent block as input, which is concatenated with the avatar motion latent $`\mathbf{m}_S`$ serving as the reference motion. We use a cross-attention layer to condition on the unified condition from the Dual Motion Encoder. Additionally, we employ a sliding-window attention mask of size $`2l`$ along the time axis for temporal smooth conditioning. We provide the more details on $`v_{\theta}`$ in Appendix <span style="color: red">B</span>.

<figure id="algo:sampling" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="minipage">
<div class="algorithm">
<div class="algorithmic">
<p>ODE timesteps <span class="math inline">{<em>t</em><sub><em>n</em></sub>}<sub><em>n</em> = 0</sub><sup><em>T</em></sup></span>, motion generator <span class="math inline"><em>v</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub></span>, video length <span class="math inline"><em>N</em></span>, block size <span class="math inline"><em>B</em></span>, max cahce size <span class="math inline"><em>M</em></span>, user inputs <span class="math inline">(<strong>a</strong><sub><em>u</em></sub>, <strong>m</strong><sub><em>u</em></sub>)</span>, avatar audio <span class="math inline"><strong>a</strong><sup><em>i</em></sup></span>, latent-to-frame decoder <span class="math inline"><code>Dec</code></span>, and id latent <span class="math inline"><em>z</em><sub><em>S</em></sub></span>. <strong>Divide</strong> the frames into <span class="math inline"><em>L</em> = ⌈<em>N</em>/<em>B</em>⌉</span> blocks <strong>Initialize</strong> <span class="math inline"><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong>, <strong>c</strong><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong></span> <span class="math inline"> ← [ ], [ ]</span> <span class="math inline">⊳</span> Frame &amp; condition caches <strong>Sample</strong> Noise block <span class="math inline"><strong>m</strong><sub><em>t</em><sub>0</sub></sub><sup><em>i</em></sup> ∼ 𝒩(0, <em>I</em>)</span>, <span class="math inline">⊳</span> <span class="math inline"><strong>m</strong><sub><em>t</em><sub>0</sub></sub><sup><em>i</em></sup> ∈ ℝ<sup><em>B</em> × <em>d</em></sup></span> <strong>Acquire</strong> ; . <strong>Set</strong> <span class="math inline"><strong>c</strong><sup><em>i</em></sup></span> <span class="math inline">←</span> <span class="math inline">(<strong>a</strong><sub><em>u</em></sub><sup><em>i</em></sup>, <strong>m</strong><sub><em>u</em></sub><sup><em>i</em></sup>, <strong>a</strong><sup><em>i</em></sup>)</span> <span class="math inline">⊳</span> Condition triplet <strong>Solve ODE:</strong> <span class="math inline"><strong>m</strong><sub><em>t</em><sub><em>j</em> + 1</sub></sub><sup><em>i</em></sup> ← <em>v</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub>(<strong>m</strong><sub><em>t</em><sub><em>j</em></sub></sub><sup><em>i</em></sup>, <em>t</em><sub><em>j</em></sub>; <strong>c</strong><sup><em>i</em></sup>, <strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong>, <strong>c</strong><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong>)</span> <strong>Decode</strong> &amp; <strong>Return</strong>   ;</p>
<p><strong>Update caches</strong>   <span class="math inline"><strong>k</strong><strong>v</strong><sub><em>i</em></sub></span>, <span class="math inline"><strong>c</strong><strong>k</strong><strong>v</strong><sub><em>i</em></sub></span> <span class="math inline">←</span> <span class="math inline"><em>v</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub>(<em>z</em><sub>1</sub><sup><em>i</em></sup>, 1; <strong>c</strong><sup><em>i</em></sup>, <strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong>, <strong>c</strong><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong>)</span> <span class="math inline"><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong><code>.pop(0)</code></span> and  <span class="math inline"><strong>c</strong><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong><code>.pop(0)</code></span> <span class="math inline"><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong></span><span><code>.append(</code><span class="math inline"><strong>k</strong><strong>v</strong><sub><em>i</em></sub></span><code>)</code></span> and  <span class="math inline"><strong>c</strong><strong>K</strong><strong>V</strong></span><span><code>.append(</code><span class="math inline"><strong>c</strong><strong>k</strong><strong>v</strong><sub><em>i</em></sub></span><code>)</code></span></p>
</div>
</div>
</div>
<figcaption><span id="algo:sampling" data-label="algo:sampling"></span> Motion inference with KV caching</figcaption>
</figure>

#### Training and Inference

To train the vector field model $`v_{\theta}`$, we formulate the diffusion forcing training objective in Eq. <a href="#eq:train_df" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq:train_df">[eq:train_df]</a> into a motion latent generation objective as follows:
``` math
\begin{equation}
	\mathcal{L}_{DF}(\theta) = \mathbb{E}_{n, t_n, \mathbf{m}^n_{t_n}}\! \| v_{\theta}(\mathbf{m}^n_{t_n}, t_n, \mathbf{c}^n) \!-\! (\mathbf{m}_1^n \!-\! \mathbf{m}_0^n)\|,
    \label{eq:train_ours}
\end{equation}
```
where $`n`$ $`\in`$ $`[1,N]`$ denotes the frame index, $`t_n`$ $`\in`$ $`[0,1]`$ is the per-frame noise timestep, $`\mathbf{c}^n = (\mathbf{a}_u^{i}, \mathbf{m}_u^i, \mathbf{a}^i)`$ is the user-avatar condition triplet, $`\mathbf{m}_{t_n}^n`$ $`\in`$ $`\mathbb{R}^d`$ is the noisy motion latent. For simplicity, we omit the reference motion condition $`\mathbf{m}_S`$ in Eq. <a href="#eq:train_ours" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq:train_ours">[eq:train_ours]</a>.

With the trained model, we can generate the interactive avatar motion given user inputs and avatar audio in an autoregressive rollout. We provide the pseudo code for motion sampling in <a href="#algo:sampling" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="algo:sampling">4</a>, which adopts rolling KV cache in a blockwise manner .

## Enhancing Motion Expressiveness

While our model enables real-time motion generation, we observe that it struggles to produce expressive motions crucial for natural human conversation. In contrast to achieving an accurate lip-sync that has an almost one-to-one match with the avatar audio, appropriate reaction to the user’s motion and audio is highly ambiguous, as there is no single *correct* response .

Moreover, as shown in <a href="#fig:vis_speaker_listener_exp" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:vis_speaker_listener_exp">5</a>, existing listening datasets generally exhibit lower motion expressiveness compared to speaking datasets, which leads models to learn passive and non-expressive listening behaviors. While prior work attempted to address it with personalized motion  or external text instructions , these methods do not address the core challenge of learning the true interactive behavior for natural interaction.

To generate vibrant and expressive reactions, we formulate this as an alignment problem and apply the Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF)  approach. The main challenge lies in defining an explicit reward for the avatar’s interactive behavior, which must account for the interplay between avatar audio, user audio, user motion, and the generated video, which are difficult to evaluate even for humans.

We adapted a reward-free method, Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) , for fine-tuning our motion generation based on diffusion forcing. Specifically, we construct preference pairs of motion latents $`(\mathbf{m}^w, \mathbf{m}^l)`$ as follows:

- **Preferred sample** $`\mathbf{m}^w`$: the motion latent from the ground-truth video, exhibiting expressive and contextually appropriate responses.

- **Less preferred sample** $`\mathbf{m}^l`$: the motion latent generated by a separately trained *talking avatar model* , conditioned solely on the avatar audio.

This paired design yields a clear signal for enhancing expressiveness, emphasizing active listening and reactive motion while leaving other aspects, such as lip sync or speech-driven motion, unchanged.

Building on the original DPO objective $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{DPO}}`$ (Eq. <a href="#eq:dpo" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq:dpo">[eq:dpo]</a>) with our constructed pairs $`(\mathbf{m}^w, \mathbf{m}^l)`$, we fine-tune our diffusion forcing model $`v_{\theta}`$ with the following objective:

``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{ft}(\theta) = \mathcal{L}_{DF}(\theta) + \lambda\mathcal{L}_{DPO}(\theta), \label{eq:total_objective}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\lambda`$ is a balancing coefficient. As a result, our model achieves efficient preference alignment without requiring a dedicated reward model, which we validate in <a href="#sec:experiments:ablation" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:experiments:ablation">5.5</a>. We provide the detailed formulation of $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{DPO}}`$ in Appendix <span style="color: red">C</span>.

<figure id="fig:vis_speaker_listener_exp" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/exp_l2_var_exp-pasted.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Variance visualization</strong> of the L2-norm of 3DMM expressions <span class="citation" data-cites="spectre"></span> for the speaker and listener on ViCo <span class="citation" data-cites="rlhg"></span> dataset. Higher variance indicates higher expressiveness.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:human_eval" data-latex-placement="t">
<p><span id="tab:quantitative_realtalk" data-label="tab:quantitative_realtalk"></span></p>
<div class="minipage">

</div>
<div class="minipage">
<p><embed src="figure/human_test_3col_final.pdf" style="width:96.0%" /> <span id="fig:human_eval" data-label="fig:human_eval"></span></p>
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Human preference study</strong> on interactive avatar generation models, comparing Avatar Forcing and INFP<span class="math inline"><sup>*</sup></span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="tab:compare_listening_vico" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="minipage">
<p><span id="tab:compare_talking_hdtf" data-label="tab:compare_talking_hdtf"></span></p>
</div>
<div class="minipage">
<p><span id="tab:compare_listening_vico" data-label="tab:compare_listening_vico"></span></p>
</div>
</figure>

# Experiments

## Dataset and Preprocessing

We use dyadic conversation video datasets: RealTalk  and ViCo . We first detect scene changes using PySceneDetect  to split the videos into individual clips. We then detect and track each face using Face-Alignment , crop and resize it to $`512{\times}512`$. Next, we separate and assign the speaker and listener audio using a visual-grounded speech separation model . All videos are converted to 25 fps, and audio is resampled to 16 kHz. Additionally, we randomly select 50 videos from the talking-head dataset HDTF  to evaluate the performance of talking-head generation.

## Implementation Details

We use the Adam optimizer  with a learning rate of $`10^{-4}`$ and a batch size of 8. We retrain the motion latent auto-encoder from  on our dataset. The latent dimension is set to $`d=512`$. For our model $`v_\theta`$, we use 8 attention heads with a hidden dimension of $`h`$ $`=`$ $`1024`$ and 1D RoPE . It is trained with $`N=50`$ frames over $`B=5`$ blocks (i.e., 10 frames per block) and $`l=2`$ look-ahead frames. For audio encoding, we extract 12 multi-scale features from Wav2Vec2.0 . For motion sampling, we use 10 NFEs with the Euler solver and a classifier-free guidance  scale of 2. All the experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU. We will release our code and models upon publication.

<figure id="fig:sota_compare" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="figure/compare-3.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative comparison of interactive head avatar generation models</strong> on the RealTalk <span class="citation" data-cites="realtalk"></span> dataset. Our model generates more reactive (red arrow) and expressive (red box) avatar motion compared to INFP*. We provide the videos in supplementary materials. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Interactive Avatar Evaluation

#### Metrics

We evaluate our model across five aspects of interactive avatar generation: Latency, Reactiveness, Motion Richness, Visual Quality, and Lip Synchronization. For **Latency**, we assume that the pre-extracted audio features and measure motion generation time using 10 NFEs. For Reactiveness, we measure the motion synchronization between the user and the avatar by utilizing the residual Pearson correlation coefficients (rPCC) on facial expression (**rPCC-exp**) and head pose (**rPCC-pose**) . For Motion Richness, we measure the Similarity Index for diversity (**SID**)  and variance (**Var**), following the previous studies . For Visual Quality, we compute the Frechet inception distance (**FID**)  and the Frechet video distance (**FVD**)  for the generated videos. We also assess the identity preservation using the cosine similarity of identity embeddings (**CSIM**)  between the reference avatar image and the generated videos. In Lip Synchronization, we compute the lip sync error distance and confidence (**LSE-C** and **LSE-D**) using the generated video and the avatar’s audio. Please refer to Appendix <span style="color: red">D</span> for details on the metrics.

#### Comparison with Interactive Head Avatar

We compare our model with the reproduced state-of-the-art dyadic talking avatar model, INFP\* , since its official implementation is not publicly available. For reference, we also include a talking avatar generation model  which does not use user motion or audio.

In <a href="#tab:quantitative_realtalk" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:quantitative_realtalk">[tab:quantitative_realtalk]</a>, we provide a quantitative comparison on the RealTalk  dataset. Avatar Forcing significantly outperforms INFP\* in terms of Reactiveness and Motion Richness, indicating that our generated avatar is much more reactive and expressive compared to the baselines. Notably, Avatar Forcing achieves a latency of 0.5s, enabling real-time interaction, and maintains Visual Quality and Lip Synchronization comparable to INFP\*. In contrast, INFP\*’s 3.4s latency makes it unsuitable for real-time applications.

We visualize the generated samples of ours and INFP\* in <a href="#fig:sota_compare" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:sota_compare">8</a>, where ours demonstrate more reactive (red arrow) and expressive motions (red box), compared to INFP\*.

#### Human Preference Study

We conduct a human preference study comparing our model with the interactive head avatar generation model INFP\*. We recruited 22 participants to evaluate 8 video sets using five perceptual metrics: **Reactiveness** measures how well the avatar reacts to user motion and audio, **Motion Richness** evaluates expressiveness of the avatar motion, **Verbal Alignment** evaluates the lip synchronization with the audio, **Non-verbal Alignment** assesses the non-verbal behaviors such as eye contact or nodding, and **Overall Preference**. We provide further details of the human study in the supplementary materials.

As shown in <a href="#fig:human_eval" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:human_eval">6</a>, our model is strongly preferred across all metrics, achieving over 80% preference in overall quality. In particular, our generated avatars exhibit expressive motion and strong non-verbal alignment, showing the effectiveness of the preference optimization (<a href="#sec:dpo" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:dpo">4.2</a>).

## Comprehensive Analysis

#### Comparison with Talking Head Avatar

We evaluate the talking capability of the avatar. We compare Avatar Forcing with four state-of-the-art talking head avatar generation models: SadTalker , Hallo3 , FLOAT , and INFP$`^*`$. We measure the visual quality with **FID**, **FVD**, and **CSIM** metrics, and assess lip synchronization using **LSE-D** and **LSE-C** used in <a href="#tab:quantitative_realtalk" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:quantitative_realtalk">[tab:quantitative_realtalk]</a>. We provide the quantitative results on the HDTF dataset  in <a href="#tab:compare_talking_hdtf" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:compare_talking_hdtf">[tab:compare_talking_hdtf]</a>. Avatar Forcing shows competitive performance on all metrics and achieves the best image and video quality. We provide visual examples in Appendix <span style="color: red">D</span>.

#### Comparison with Listening Head Avatar

We further evaluate the listening capability of our model. We compare Avatar Forcing with the listening head avatar generation models, including RLHG , L2L , DIM , and INFP\*, using the ViCo . We measure Frechet distance (FD) for the expression and pose, and rPCC, SID, and Var metrics used in <a href="#tab:quantitative_realtalk" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:quantitative_realtalk">[tab:quantitative_realtalk]</a> but with respect to expression and head pose, respectively. Since the baseline models are not publicly available, we take the results from DIM . In <a href="#tab:compare_listening_vico" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:compare_listening_vico">7</a>, our model outperforms the baselines on almost all of the metrics. In particular, Avatar Forcing achieves the best user–avatar synchronized motion generation (rPCC).

<figure id="tab:ablation_realtalk" data-latex-placement="t">
<p><span id="tab:ablation_realtalk" data-label="tab:ablation_realtalk"></span></p>
<div class="minipage">

</div>
</figure>

## Ablation Study

In this section, we conduct ablation studies on (i) the necessity of using user motion in the Dual Motion Encoder and (ii) the importance of preference optimization. We provide further ablation studies, including the blockwise look-ahead attention mask, in Appendix <span style="color: red">D</span>.

#### User Motion

To validate the necessity of using user motion for interactive avatar generation, we compare our model with a variant that does not take user motion as input. As shown in <a href="#tab:ablation_realtalk" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:ablation_realtalk">9</a>, removing user motion leads to significantly less reactive behavior (Reactiveness) and reduced expressiveness in motion (Motion Richness).

Furthermore, as visualized in <a href="#fig:ablation_user" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:ablation_user">10</a>, the model without user motion produces static behavior whenever the user’s audio is silent. This occurs even in the presence of strong non-verbal cues, such as smiling, as the model cannot perceive visual signals. In contrast, our model, which uses user motion, generates a reactive avatar that naturally smiles right after the user smiles (<a href="#fig:ablation_user" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:ablation_user">10</a> red arrow) and becomes more focused when the user speaks (<a href="#fig:ablation_user" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:ablation_user">10</a> green box).

#### Direct Preference Optimization

To assess the impact of the preference optimization, we compare our model against a variant without fine-tuning. As shown in <a href="#tab:ablation_realtalk" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:ablation_realtalk">9</a>, preference optimization significantly improves the Reactiveness metrics (rPCC-Exp and rPCC-Pose), which quantify user-avatar motion synchronization. It also substantially boosts the Motion Richness metrics (SID and Var), indicating more expressive and varied motion.

As visualized in <a href="#fig:ablation_dpo" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:ablation_dpo">11</a>, the model without preference optimization generates noticeably reduced diversity in facial expressions and head movement. It also exhibits weaker interaction, failing to respond to the user’s smile.

In contrast, our fine-tuned model generates an expressive avatar that shows natural head movement (<a href="#fig:ablation_dpo" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:ablation_dpo">11</a> red box) and smiles more broadly along with the user (<a href="#fig:ablation_dpo" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:ablation_dpo">11</a> red arrow). We provide further analysis of our DPO method in Appendix <span style="color: red">D</span>.

<figure id="fig:ablation_user">
<embed src="figure/ablation-user-3.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Ablation study on the user motion</strong>. Without <span class="math inline"><strong>m</strong><sub><em>u</em></sub></span>, the avatar remains static even when the user smiles. With <span class="math inline"><strong>m</strong><sub><em>u</em></sub></span>, our model reacts by smiling after the user (red arrow) and shifting to a focused expression when the user begins speaking (green box).</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:ablation_dpo" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/ablation-dpo-3.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Ablation study on preference optimization</strong>. Model fine-tuned with DPO produces more expressive motion (red box) and reactive (red arrow) compared to model without DPO. </figcaption>
</figure>

# Conclusion

We proposed Avatar Forcing, a real-time interactive head avatar model based on diffusion forcing, that generates reactive and expressive motion using both the verbal and non-verbal user signals. Avatar Forcing takes a step toward truly interactive virtual avatars and opens new possibilities for real-time human–AI communication. We also plan to release our code and pre-trained model weights to advance community development and accelerate future research.

**Discussion**  We leave further discussion, including ethical considerations, limitations, and future work, in the Appendix <span style="color: red">E</span>.

#### Organization

The appendix is organized as follows: In <a href="#sec:apx_background" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_background">7</a>, we provide the additional backgrounds of our work. We describe the details of our model architecture in <a href="#sec:apx_architecture" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_architecture">8</a> and the preference optimization method in <a href="#sec:apx_dpo" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_dpo">9</a>. Experimental details are presented in <a href="#sec:apx_exp_detail" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_exp_detail">10</a>, and further discussion is provided in <a href="#sec:apx_discussion" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_discussion">11</a>.

# Background

#### Flow Matching

Flow matching  is a generative model that transforms a simple prior distribution $`p_0`$, for example, a Gaussian distribution, into the target data distribution $`p_1`$ via an ordinary differential equation (ODE):
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \frac{d x_t}{dt} = v_{\theta}(x_t, t), ~~ t \in [0, 1], \label{eq:ode}
\end{equation}
```
where for fixed $`x_0`$ $`\sim`$ $`p_0`$ and $`x_1`$ $`\sim`$ $`p_1`$, the intermediate sample is a linear interpolation $`x_t = tx_1 + (1-t) x_0`$. The training objective of flow matching is to regress the vector field $`v_{\theta}`$ toward the target vector field $`v_t = x_1 - x_0`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{FM}(\theta) = \mathbb{E}_{t, x_t} \left[\| v_{\theta}(x_t, t) - (x_1 - x_0)\|\right]. \label{eq:train_fm}
\end{equation}
```
It then generates target samples by solving Eq. <a href="#eq:ode" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq:ode">[eq:ode]</a>. Note that flow matching can be interpreted as a diffusion model  where a noise schedule follows the linear trajectory between the prior and the target data.

# Details on Model Architecture

In <a href="#sec:apx_motion_ae" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_motion_ae">8.1</a>, we provide more details on the motion latent auto-encoder. In <a href="#sec:apx_vector_field_model" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_vector_field_model">8.2</a>, we provide more details on the vector field predictor $`v_\theta`$.

## Motion Latent Auto-encoder

In <a href="#fig:motion_latent_ae" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:motion_latent_ae">12</a>, we show an overview of the motion latent auto-encoder. It encodes an image into a latent vector that can be decomposed into an identity representation (i.e., appearance) and the motion representation. This auto-encoder is trained to reconstruct a driving image using a source image that shares the same identity. During each training iteration, the encoder encodes two images $`S`$ and $`D`$ drawn from the same video clip, and computes the $`z_{S \to D} := z_S + \mathbf{m}_D`$ that transforms the source image into the reconstructed $`\hat{D}`$. This explicit decomposition yields a compact motion representation, enabling fast motion generation.

We train this auto-encoder on our dataset, following the training objective described in the original paper. For more details, including the property of this latent space, training details, please refer to the original papers .

<figure id="fig:motion_latent_ae">
<embed src="figure/motion-latent-ae.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Overview of Motion Latent Encoder</strong>. It encodes an image into a latent vector that has explicit identity-motion decomposition.<span id="fig:motion_latent_ae" data-label="fig:motion_latent_ae"></span></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:motion_generator">
<embed src="figure/motion_generator.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Detailed architecture for Motion Generator in <span class="math inline"><em>v</em><sub><em>θ</em></sub></span></strong>.<span id="fig:motion_generator" data-label="fig:motion_generator"></span></figcaption>
</figure>

## Vector Field Model $`v_\theta`$

#### Model Architecture

The model $`v_{\theta}`$ comprises two main components: the Dual Motion Encoder and the Causal DFoT Motion Generator. The Dual Motion Encoder unifies three multimodal inputs through a cross-attention layer, computed as $`\text{softmax}\left(\frac{QK^\top}{\sqrt{d}}\right)V`$, where

``` math
\begin{equation}
    Q = \mathbf{q}W_q, \qquad
    K = \mathbf{k}W_k, \qquad
    V = \mathbf{v}W_v,
\end{equation}
```

and $`W_q, W_k, W_v \in \mathbb{R}^{d \times d}`$ are learnable projection matrices for the query $`\mathbf{q}`$, key $`\mathbf{k}`$, and value $`\mathbf{v} \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times d}`$, respectively ($`N`$ is the number of latents). In the first cross-attention layer, the encoder captures holistic verbal and non-verbal user motion by using the user motion latent $`\mathbf{m}_u`$ as the query. In the second layer, it integrates this aligned user motion with the avatar’s audio by taking the avatar audio as the query. We use four attention heads, each with a hidden dimension of $`d = 512`$, for both cross-attention layers.

In <a href="#fig:motion_generator" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:motion_generator">13</a>, we provide a detailed architecture for the motion generator. It consists of eight DFoT transformer blocks followed by a transformer head. Specifically, in each DFoT block, noisy latents $`(\mathbf{m}_{t_1}^1, \mathbf{m}_{t_2}^2, \cdots, \mathbf{m}_{t_N}^N)`$ are modulated by the flow time $`\mathbf{t} = (t_1, t_2, \cdots, t_N)`$ through a shared AdaLN scale-shift coefficients (ToTimeEmb layer) .

For the attention modules, we use Blockwise Causal Look-ahead Mask (Eq. (<span style="color: red">5</span>)) in self-attention and a Sliding-window Attention Mask for aligning the driving signal $`\mathbf{c}^{1:N}`$ to the noisy latents. Specifically, we introduce the Blockwise Casual Look-ahead Mask to ensure the causal motion generation in our motion latent space, which significantly improves the temporal consistency of the generated video, as demonstrated in <a href="#sec:apx_additional_ablation" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:apx_additional_ablation">10.5</a>. Unlike the recent video diffusion models that employ a spatio-temporal compression module  where each latent correlates to multiple video frames by the compression rate (e.g., 4$`\times`$ or 8$`\times`$), our motion latent has one-to-one correspondence with each frame in pixel space. Under this setting, a simple (blockwise) causal mask alone produces the temporal inconsistencies across the frames or blocks.

# Details on Preference Optimization

#### Training Objective Formulation

Inspired by DiffusionDPO , we formulate the training objective $`\mathcal{L}_{DPO}`$ in the context of diffusion forcing . Let $`(\mathbf{m}^l, \mathbf{m}^w)`$ denote a pair of less-preferred and preferred motion latents, each consisting of $`N`$ frames, where $`\mathbf{m}^l \coloneq (\mathbf{m}^{l, n})_{n=1}^{N}`$ and $`\mathbf{m}^w \coloneq (\mathbf{m}^{w, n})_{n=1}^{N}`$. Following the per-token independent noising process of diffusion forcing, we construct the noisy latent pairs as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \mathbf{m}_{t_n}^{w, n} &\coloneq t_n \mathbf{m}^{w, n} + (1 - t_n)\mathbf{m}_0^{n}, \\
    \mathbf{m}_{t_n}^{l, n} &\coloneq t_n \mathbf{m}^{l, n} + (1 - t_n)\mathbf{m}_0^{n},
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```
where $`n \in [1, N]`$ is the frame index, $`t_n \in [0, 1]`$ is the $`n`$-th flow time, and $`\mathbf{m}_0 \coloneq (\mathbf{m}_0^{n})_{n=1}^{N} \in \mathbb{R}^{N \times d}`$ is the noise sequence. With these notations, we formulate $`\mathcal{L}_{DPO}`$ as
``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
\mathcal{L}_{DPO}(\theta)
&= -\mathbb{E}_{n, t_n, \mathbf{c}^n, (\mathbf{m}^{w, n},\mathbf{m}^{l, n})} \\
& \log \sigma\Big(
    - \beta \big[ \|v^{w, n}_{t_n} - v_{\theta}(\mathbf{m}^{w, n}_{t_n}, t_n, \mathbf{c}^n)\| \\
 & \quad - \|v^{w, n}_{t_n} - v_{\text{ref}}(\mathbf{m}^{w, n}_{t_n}, t_n, \mathbf{c}^n)\|  \\
 & \quad - (\|v^{l, n}_{t_n} - v_{\theta}(\mathbf{m}^{l, n}_{t_n}, t_n, \mathbf{c}^n)\| \\
 & \quad - \|v^{l, n}_{t_n} - v_{\text{ref}}(\mathbf{m}^{l,n}_{t_n}, t_n, \mathbf{c}^n)\|)\big] \Big), \\
\end{aligned}
\label{eq:dpo_train}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathbf{c}^n`$ is the $`n`$-th unified condition, $`v_{\text{ref}}`$ is the reference vector field model, the target vector fields for less-preferred and preferred samples are given by
``` math
\begin{equation}
v_{t_n}^{l, n} \coloneq \mathbf{m}^{l, n} - \mathbf{m}_0^{n} ~~~\text{and}~~~ v_{t_n}^{w, n} \coloneq \mathbf{m}^{w, n} - \mathbf{m}_0^{n}.
\end{equation}
```

# Experimental Details

## Training Details

We train the vector field model $`v_{\theta}`$ in Eq. (<span style="color: red">6</span>) for 2000k steps while freezing the motion latent auto-encoder. Through the training, we use L1 distance for $`\| \cdot \|`$.

For fine-tuning the model using the proposed preference optimization method in Eq. (<span style="color: red">7</span>), we set the balancing coefficient to $`\lambda=0.1`$ and the deviation parameter to $`\beta=1000`$. We initialize the reference model $`v_{\text{ref}}`$ with the same weights as the trained $`v_{\theta}`$. We fine-tune $`v_\theta`$ for 5k steps and observe that additional tuning does not yield further performance gains.

## Baseline Implementation

One major challenge of evaluating an interactive head avatar model is the **absence of official implementation of baseline methods**. To bridge this gap, we reproduce INFP  on the motion latent space of  , following its core module, Motion Guider and denote the reproduced model as INFP\*. Based on the description in the original paper, we adopt a bidirectional Transformer encoder for motion generation, where a single window consists of $`N=75`$ frames and additional $`10`$ frames serve as context frames. For Motion Guider, we set $`K=64`$ for both verbal and non-verbal motion memory banks. We train INFP\* on our dataset for 2000k steps.

<figure id="tab:apx_ablation_realtalk" data-latex-placement="t">
<p><span id="tab:apx_ablation_realtalk" data-label="tab:apx_ablation_realtalk"></span></p>
</figure>

## Evaluation Metrics

In this section, we provide more details on the evaluation metrics used in the main paper.

#### Reactiveness and Motion Richness

Reactiveness and Motion Richness are computed using the EMOCA-based  3D morphable models (3DMMs) that model the facial dynamics via 50-dim expression parameters and 6-dim pose parameters. We extract those parameters using an off-the-shelf 3DMM extractor, SPECTRE , for each video frame. Let us denote $`x\in\mathbb{R}^{N\times d}`$ as the ground-truth user parameters, $`y\in\mathbb{R}^{N\times d}`$ as the ground-truth avatar parameters, and $`\hat{y}\in\mathbb{R}^{N\times d}`$ as the generated avatar parameters. $`L`$ is the number of frames and $`d`$ is the feature dimension. As reported in Tab. <span style="color: red">1</span> and Tab. <span style="color: red">4</span>, we can compute rPCC, SID, Var, and FD for expression and pose, respectively.

- **rPCC** (residual Pearson Correlation Coefficients)  is to measure the motion synchronization between the user parameters and avatar parameters. Specifically, L1 distance is used to measure the discrepancy between generated PCC and ground-truth PCC where we define PCC as a function of $`z\in\mathbb{R}^{N\times d}`$ given ground-truth user parameters $`x`$:
  ``` math
  \begin{equation}
      \text{PCC}(z|x) = \frac{\sum (z_i - \bar{z})(x_i - \bar{x})}{\sqrt{\sum(z_i - \bar{z})^2 \sum (x_i - \bar{x})^2}},
  \end{equation}
  ```
  where $`i\in[0,N]`$ is the frame index, and $`\bar{z}`$ and $`\bar{x}`$ denote the mean of $`z`$ and $`y`$, respectively. Based on this notation, we can define rPCC as $`|\text{PCC}(y|x) - \text{PCC}(\hat{y}|x)|`$.

- **SID** (Shannon Index for Diversity)  is to measure the motion diversity of the generated avatars using $`K`$-means clustering on 3DMM parameters. Following , we compute the average entropy (Shannon index) of the clusters with $`K=15, 9`$ for expression and pose, respectively.

- **Var** is the variance of the parameters from generated avatars, which is computed along the time axis and then averaged along the feature axis.

- **FD** (Frechet Distance)  measures the distance between the expression and pose distributions of the generated avatars and the ground truth by calculating
  ``` math
  \begin{equation}
      |\mu_{\hat{y}} - \mu_{y}| + \text{tr}(\Sigma_{\hat{y}} + \Sigma_{y} - 2 (\Sigma_{\hat{y}} \Sigma_{y})^{\frac{1}{2}}), \label{eq:fd}
  \end{equation}
  ```
  where $`\mu`$ and $`\Sigma`$ are the mean and the covariance matrix, respectively.

#### Visual Quality

We utilize FID  and FVD  to assess the image and video quality of the generated avatars, and CSIM  to measure the identity preservation performance of avatar generation models.

- **FID** (Frechet Inception Distance) measures the quality of the generated frames by comparing the distribution of image features extracted from a pre-trained feature extractor . The FD computation in Eq. <a href="#eq:fd" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq:fd">[eq:fd]</a> is adopted using the extracted image features.

- **FVD** (Frechet Video Distance) quantifies the spatio-temporal quality of the generated videos by comparing the feature distributions of real and generated videos in a learned video feature space . It reflects both frame-wise quality and temporal consistency. The FD computation in Eq. <a href="#eq:fd" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="eq:fd">[eq:fd]</a> is adopted using the extracted video features.

- **CSIM** (Cosine Similarity for Identity Embedding) evaluates identity preservation by computing cosine similarity between the facial embeddings from the generated and the source image, extracted using ArcFace .

#### Lip Synchronization

We compute LSE-D and LSE-C  to assess the alignment between the generated lip motion and the corresponding audio.

- **LSE-D** and **LSE-C** (Lip Sync Error Distance and Confidence): Both metrics are derived from a pre-trained SyncNet-based audio–visual synchronization model. LSE-D measures the distance between the audio and lip embeddings, where lower values indicate better synchronization. LSE-C measures the confidence score of synchronized audio–visual pairs, where higher values indicate more accurate lip-audio alignment.

## Human Evaluation

In <a href="#fig:apx_human_eval" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:apx_human_eval">16</a>, we show the interface used for our human evaluation. To improve the evaluation consistency, we additionally provided participants with a reference test and answer sheet. We asked 22 participants to compare 8 videos based on 5 evaluation metrics and indicate their preference. We also provide a video test sheet. Please refer to *“04_human_evaluation_XX.mp4”*.

<figure id="fig:mask_compare" data-latex-placement="h">
<embed src="figure/mask_compare.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Attention Mask Comparison.</strong> (Left) framewise causal mask; (Middle) blockwise causal mask; (Right) blockwise causal look-ahead mask (Ours).</figcaption>
</figure>

## Additional Ablation Studies

In <a href="#tab:apx_ablation_realtalk" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:apx_ablation_realtalk">14</a>, we present the ablation studies on our model with additional metrics, including Visual Quality and Lip Synchronization. We provide a video results of the ablation study. Please refer to the videos *“02_ablation_wo_user_motion.mp4”* and *“02_ablation_wo_DPO.mp4”*.

Moreover, we provide video ablation results on the attention mask, where each masking method is illustrated in <a href="#fig:mask_compare" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:mask_compare">15</a>. **The motion jittering observed when using only the blockwise causal mask is clearly visible in the video results, yet difficult to capture with quantitative metrics.** We highly recommend watching the ablation video *“02_ablation_attention_mask_XX.mp4”*.

<figure id="fig:apx_human_eval" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/appendix-human-evaluation-screenshot.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Human evaluation interface</strong>. (Left) Instructions for human evaluation; (Middle) A reference sheet for consistent evaluation; (Right) Test and answer sheet.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Supplementary Visual Results

#### Comparison with Interactive Head Avatar

We provide the video results to further support the visual results in Fig. <span style="color: red">6</span>. Please refer to *“01_interactive_avatar_comparison_XX.mp4”*. We also provide a video comparison results using the DEMO videos of Official INFP . Please refer to *“01_interactive_avatar_comparison_demo.mp4”*

#### Comparison with Talking Head Avatar

In <a href="#fig:apx_talking_head" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:apx_talking_head">17</a>, we compare our model with SadTalker , Hallo3 , FLOAT , and INFP\*  for talking head avatar generation bu dropping the user condition at inference. Avatar Forcing can generate competitive results compared to state-of-the-art models, while our model successfully reflects user signals. We also provide the video comparison results. Please refer to *“03_talking_XX.mp4”*.

#### Comparison with Listening Head Avatar

In <a href="#fig:apx_listening_head" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:apx_listening_head">18</a>, we compare our model with RLHG , L2L , DIM , and INFP\*  for listening head avatar generation. Avatar Forcing can generate competitive results with more expressive facial expression. Please refer to *“03_listening_XX.mp4”* for video results.

# Discussion

#### Ethical Consideration

Our method can generate more engaging and interactive head-avatar videos, broadening positive applications such as virtual avatar chat, virtual education, and other communication tools by providing users with a more immersive experience. However, realistic interactive head avatar videos also pose risks of misuse, including identity spoofing or malicious deepfakes. Adding watermarks to generated videos and applying a restricted license can help mitigate these risks. We also encourage the community to use our generated data to train deepfake detection models.

#### Limitation and Future Work

Our system focuses on modeling interactive conversations through a head-motion latent space, which enables natural and expressive interactions. However, this design limits the modeling of richer bodily cues, such as hand gestures, that contribute to more dynamic communication.

Moreover, while our model captures user-driven conversational cues via the motion latents, certain scenarios may require more explicit controllability, such as directing eye gaze or emphasizing emotional shifts. We believe that incorporating additional user signals, including eye-tracking or emotion-tracking inputs, can address these limitations. Since our framework has no architecture constraints on adding new conditions, such signals can be incorporated into future extensions of our system.

<figure id="fig:apx_talking_head" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/compare-talking.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative comparison on talking head avatar generation</strong>.<span id="fig:apx_talking_head" data-label="fig:apx_talking_head"></span></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:apx_listening_head" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/compare_listening.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative comparison on listening head avatar generation</strong>.<span id="fig:apx_listening_head" data-label="fig:apx_listening_head"></span></figcaption>
</figure>

## References

1. Synthesia
2. Hedra Realtime Avatar
3. Pika Audio-Driven Performance Model
4. PySceneDetect
5. Disentangling length from quality in direct preference optimization
6. Beyond One-Preference-Fits-All Alignment: Multi-Objective Direct Preference Optimization
7. Streamdit: Real-time streaming text-to-video generation [arXiv:2507.03745](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.03745)
8. IIANet: An Intra-and Inter-Modality Attention Network for Audio-Visual Speech Separation
9. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback
10. Diffusion model alignment using direct preference optimization
11. Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model
12. Diffusion-based Realistic Listening Head Generation via Hybrid Motion Modeling
13. Emoca: Emotion driven monocular face capture and animation
14. Learning to listen: Modeling non-deterministic dyadic facial motion
15. Neural discrete representation learning
16. Visual speech-aware perceptual 3d facial expression reconstruction from videos [arXiv:2207.11094](../2022/2207.11094.md)
17. Genie 3: A New Frontier for World Models
18. Magicinfinite: Generating infinite talking videos with your words and voice [arXiv:2503.05978](../2025/2503.05978.md)
19. Mocha: Towards movie-grade talking character synthesis [arXiv:2503.23307](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.23307)
20. Hunyuanportrait: Implicit condition control for enhanced portrait animation
21. Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models [arXiv:2503.20314](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.20314)
22. TalkingMachines: Real-Time Audio-Driven FaceTime-Style Video via Autoregressive Diffusion Models [arXiv:2506.03099](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.03099)
23. Omnihuman-1: Rethinking the scaling-up of one-stage conditioned human animation models [arXiv:2502.01061](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01061)
24. Mini-omni2: Towards open-source gpt-4o with vision, speech and duplex capabilities [arXiv:2410.11190](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.11190)
25. Gpt-4 technical report [arXiv:2303.08774](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774)
26. Mfr-net: Multi-faceted responsive listening head generation via denoising diffusion model
27. DiTaiListener: Controllable High Fidelity Listener Video Generation with Diffusion [arXiv:2504.04010](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.04010)
28. Perceptual conversational head generation with regularized driver and enhanced renderer
29. Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer
30. Generalization in generation: A closer look at exposure bias [arXiv:1910.00292](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.00292)
31. Affective faces for goal-driven dyadic communication [arXiv:2301.10939](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.10939)
32. Customlistener: Text-guided responsive interaction for user-friendly listening head generation
33. Responsive listening head generation: a benchmark dataset and baseline
34. Interactive conversational head generation
35. Hallo3: Highly dynamic and realistic portrait image animation with video diffusion transformer
36. Diffusion forcing: Next-token prediction meets full-sequence diffusion
37. From slow bidirectional to fast autoregressive video diffusion models
38. Self Forcing: Bridging the Train-Test Gap in Autoregressive Video Diffusion
39. Frame Context Packing and Drift Prevention in Next-Frame-Prediction Video Diffusion Models
40. Autoregressive Adversarial Post-Training for Real-Time Interactive Video Generation
41. One-step diffusion with distribution matching distillation
42. Improved distribution matching distillation for fast image synthesis
43. Float: Generative motion latent flow matching for audio-driven talking portrait
44. AV-Flow: Transforming Text to Audio-Visual Human-like Interactions [arXiv:2502.13133](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.13133)
45. INFP: Audio-driven interactive head generation in dyadic conversations
46. ARIG: Autoregressive Interactive Head Generation for Real-time Conversations
47. Midas: Multimodal interactive digital-human synthesis via real-time autoregressive video generation [arXiv:2508.19320](https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.19320)
48. Dualtalk: Dual-speaker interaction for 3d talking head conversations
49. Dim: Dyadic interaction modeling for social behavior generation
50. History-Guided Video Diffusion
51. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models
52. Animate Anyone: Consistent and Controllable Image-to-Video Synthesis for Character Animation
53. Adding conditional control to text-to-image diffusion models
54. Classifier-free diffusion guidance [arXiv:2207.12598](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.12598)
55. Score-based generative modeling through stochastic differential equations
56. Flow matching for generative modeling
57. Flow matching in latent space [arXiv:2307.08698](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.08698)
58. wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations [arXiv:2006.11477](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11477)
59. Styletalker: One-shot style-based audio-driven talking head video generation [arXiv:2208.10922](https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.10922)
60. A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild
61. Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild
62. Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation
63. Dreamtalk: When expressive talking head generation meets diffusion probabilistic models [arXiv:2312.09767](../2023/2312.09767.md)
64. Anitalker: animate vivid and diverse talking faces through identity-decoupled facial motion encoding
65. One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video conferencing
66. Latent image animator: Learning to animate images via latent space navigation [arXiv:2203.09043](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.09043)
67. Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation
68. StyleLipSync: Style-based personalized lip-sync video generation
69. Learning to Generate Conditional Tri-plane for 3D-aware Expression Controllable Portrait Animation [arXiv:2404.00636](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00636)
70. Portrait4D: Learning One-Shot 4D Head Avatar Synthesis using Synthetic Data
71. LivePortrait: Efficient Portrait Animation with Stitching and Retargeting Control [arXiv:2407.03168](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03168)
72. Alias-free generative adversarial networks
73. Gentron: Delving deep into diffusion transformers for image and video generation [arXiv:2312.04557](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.04557)
74. Autoregressive image generation without vector quantization
75. Roformer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding
76. Scalable diffusion models with transformers
77. Pixart-$\alpha$: Fast training of diffusion transformer for photorealistic text-to-image synthesis [arXiv:2310.00426](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.00426)
78. Vasa-1: Lifelike audio-driven talking faces generated in real time
79. Emo: Emote portrait alive generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions
80. Loopy: Taming Audio-Driven Portrait Avatar with Long-Term Motion Dependency [arXiv:2409.02634](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02634)
81. Gaia: Zero-shot talking avatar generation [arXiv:2311.15230](../2023/2311.15230.md)
82. Aniportrait: Audio-driven synthesis of photorealistic portrait animation [arXiv:2403.17694](../2024/2403.17694.md)
83. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models
84. Denoising diffusion implicit models [arXiv:2010.02502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502)
85. Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models
86. Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents [arXiv:2204.06125](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125)
87. Video generation models as world simulators
88. Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets [arXiv:2311.15127](https://arxiv.org/abs/2311.15127)
89. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis
90. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning [arXiv:2307.04725](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04725)
91. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis
92. Instaflow: One step is enough for high-quality diffusion-based text-to-image generation
93. Variational inference with normalizing flows
94. Latent consistency models: Synthesizing high-resolution images with few-step inference [arXiv:2310.04378](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04378)
95. Champ: Controllable and consistent human image animation with 3d parametric guidance [arXiv:2403.14781](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.14781)
96. Hallo: Hierarchical Audio-Driven Visual Synthesis for Portrait Image Animation [arXiv:2406.08801](../2024/2406.08801.md)
97. Human Motion Diffusion Model
98. Density estimation using real nvp [arXiv:1605.08803](https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.08803)
99. Voicebox: Text-guided multilingual universal speech generation at scale
100. Boosting Latent Diffusion with Flow Matching [arXiv:2312.07360](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07360)
101. Consistency models [arXiv:2303.01469](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.01469)
102. Distilling Diffusion Models into Conditional GANs [arXiv:2405.05967](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.05967)
103. Auto-encoding variational bayes [arXiv:1312.6114](https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114)
104. Dpm-solver: A fast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps
105. Dpm-solver++: Fast solver for guided sampling of diffusion probabilistic models [arXiv:2211.01095](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01095)
106. Generative adversarial nets
107. Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language understanding
108. One-step diffusion with distribution matching distillation
109. Faster diffusion: Rethinking the role of unet encoder in diffusion models [arXiv:2312.09608](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09608)
110. Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow [arXiv:2209.03003](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.03003)
111. Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan
112. Distilling the Knowledge in a Neural Network [arXiv:1503.02531](https://arxiv.org/abs/1503.02531)
113. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric
114. High-resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with conditional gans
115. Towards real-world blind face restoration with generative facial prior
116. A good image generator is what you need for high-resolution video synthesis [arXiv:2104.15069](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.15069)
117. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition [arXiv:1409.1556](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556)
118. Instructpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions [arXiv:2211.09800](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.09800)
119. First order motion model for image animation
120. Diffposetalk: Speech-driven stylistic 3d facial animation and head pose generation via diffusion models
121. Faceformer: Speech-driven 3d facial animation with transformers
122. Echomimic: Lifelike audio-driven portrait animations through editable landmark conditions [arXiv:2407.08136](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08136)
123. V-Express: Conditional Dropout for Progressive Training of Portrait Video Generation [arXiv:2406.02511](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02511)
124. Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation
125. Styletalk: One-shot talking head generation with controllable speaking styles
126. Eamm: One-shot emotional talking face via audio-based emotion-aware motion model
127. Stylesync: High-fidelity generalized and personalized lip sync in style-based generator
128. Emmn: Emotional motion memory network for audio-driven emotional talking face generation
129. Videoretalking: Audio-based lip synchronization for talking head video editing in the wild
130. Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual control
131. Neural ordinary differential equations
132. A morphable model for the synthesis of 3D faces
133. Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution editable talking face generation via pre-trained stylegan
134. Movie Gen: A Cast of Media Foundation Models [arXiv:2410.13720](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13720)
135. Edtalk: Efficient disentanglement for emotional talking head synthesis
136. pytorch-fid: FID Score for PyTorch
137. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric \& challenges [arXiv:1812.01717](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01717)
138. Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition
139. Keysync: A robust approach for leakage-free lip synchronization in high resolution [arXiv:2505.00497](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00497)
140. Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set
141. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization [arXiv:1412.6980](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980)
142. Layer normalization
143. Vfhq: A high-quality dataset and benchmark for video face super-resolution
144. The Ryerson Audio-Visual Database of Emotional Speech and Song (RAVDESS): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in North American English
145. Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset
146. Fine-grained head pose estimation without keypoints
147. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation
148. Implicit Motion Function
149. Diffusionavatars: Deferred diffusion for high-fidelity 3d head avatars
150. Attention is all you need
151. Pyramidal flow matching for efficient video generative modeling [arXiv:2410.05954](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.05954)
152. Emotion recognition from speech using wav2vec 2.0 embeddings [arXiv:2104.03502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.03502)
153. Diffused heads: Diffusion models beat gans on talking-face generation
154. Faces that Speak: Jointly Synthesising Talking Face and Speech from Text
155. Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face generation
156. Dinet: Deformation inpainting network for realistic face visually dubbing on high resolution video
157. Synctalkface: Talking face generation with precise lip-syncing via audio-lip memory
158. How far are we from solving the 2D \& 3D Face Alignment problem? (and a dataset of 230,000 3D facial landmarks)
159. GMTalker: Gaussian Mixture based Emotional talking video Portraits [arXiv:2312.07669](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.07669)
160. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision
161. Megaportraits: One-shot megapixel neural head avatars
162. Audio2head: Audio-driven one-shot talking-head generation with natural head motion [arXiv:2107.09293](../2021/2107.09293.md)
163. HSEmotion: High-speed emotion recognition library
164. Image Style Transfer Using Convolutional Neural Networks [doi:10.1109/CVPR.2016.265](https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.265)
165. Bisenet: Bilateral segmentation network for real-time semantic segmentation
166. Celebv-text: A large-scale facial text-video dataset
167. Real-Time Radiance Fields for Single-Image Portrait View Synthesis
168. EMOPortraits: Emotion-enhanced Multimodal One-shot Head Avatars
169. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units
170. Imagenet classification with deep convolutional neural networks
171. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset
172. Going deeper with convolutions
173. The frobnicatable foo filter
174. Frobnication tutorial
175. Frobnication
176. Frobnication revisited
177. Can a machine frobnicate?
178. Can a computer frobnicate?
