---
arxiv_id: '2601.21269'
title: Lightweight High-Fidelity Low-Bitrate Talking Face Compression for 3D Video
  Conference
authors:
- Jianglong Li
- Jun Xu
- Bingcong Lu
- Zhengxue Cheng
- Hongwei Hu
- Ronghua Wu
- Li Song
submitted: '2026-01-29'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.AI
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.21269
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 7/61
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:11:10+00:00'
references_parsed: 61
arxiv_version: ''
---

<div class="IEEEkeywords">

3D Gaussian Splatting, Video Compression, Video Conference, Neural Rendering

</div>

<figure id="fig:overview" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="vcip2025/figure/framework_modify.pdf" />
<figcaption>Overall framework. The left panel shows the workflow of the proposed method. The encoder extracts expression parameter <span class="math inline"><em>ψ</em></span> and pose parameter <span class="math inline"><em>θ</em></span> from the input image and encodes them into a bitstream, which is then decoded by the decoder to drive the neural renderer and generate the facial image. The right panel illustrates the neural renderer. The compressed facial model is first decoded into Gaussian attributes and MLP. The decoded expression parameters <span class="math inline"><em>ψ̂</em></span> are processed by the FLAME model and MLP to obtain Gaussian point positions and attribute offsets. Finally, Gaussian attributes are splatted from the viewpoint provided by the decoded pose parameters <span class="math inline"><em>θ̂</em></span> to reconstruct the facial image.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Introduction

In recent years, the growing demand for immersive and interactive communication has driven rapid advancements in 3D video conferencing. However, achieving high-fidelity 3D talking face representation at low bitrates remains a fundamental challenge, as real-time applications must balance visual quality, efficiency, and transmission constraints.

Traditional 2D video compression standards like HEVC and AV1 focus on efficient pixel-based encoding for a single viewpoint and do not support the representation of 3D facial geometry. To address this, 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) , such as FLAME , have been used to encode identity, pose, and expressions, with recent methods enabling real-time parameter extraction. However, these approaches often lack reconstruction fidelity for practical 3D video conferencing. Implicit neural representations, particularly Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) offer high-fidelity rendering but remain too slow and heavy for real-time use, even with compression,. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has emerged as a more efficient alternative, and several works have combined 3DGS with morphable face models to achieve high-quality, real-time talking face rendering.Notably, FlashAvatar introduces a uniform Gaussian field with spatial offsets to better capture subtle details and non-surface regions, further enhancing visual quality and rendering speed. Despite these advances, directly applying 3DGS to video conferencing still faces challenges in extracting and updating facial metadata, compressing Gaussian attributes, and balancing compression and fidelity.

Another key challenge is the storage and transmission overhead associated with 3DGS. Significant redundancy exists among Gaussian attributes, motivating research into compact representations. Approaches such as Gaussian pruning , codebook-based quantization , and entropy-based compression have been proposed to reduce attribute redundancy. Spatial redundancy can be minimized by structuring Gaussians into 3D or 2D grids , while neural and latent vector representations further enhance storage efficiency. There are also some works that focus on training and compressing 3DGS for free-viewpoint video (FVV) , but these methods are not suitable for video conferencing scenarios.

To address these challenges, we propose a high-fidelity, low-bitrate 3D talking face compression framework tailored for 3D video conferencing. Our method integrates FLAME-based parametric modeling with 3DGS to construct an efficient talking face representation. Instead of transmitting raw video frames or dense 3D models, we employ a metadata-driven approach, encoding only essential facial parameters in real time. The decoder reconstructs the talking face using a Gaussian-based head model, significantly reducing bitrate while maintaining high visual quality. Furthermore, we introduce a compact representation and compression scheme for the face model, including Gaussian attribute compression and lightweight MLP-based neural rendering optimization, reducing the face model size from 4.3MB to 0.59MB and further improving transmission efficiency and storage overhead.

In summary, our main contributions are as follows:

1.  We propose a novel 3D talking face representation for video conferencing, integrating real-time FLAME parameter extraction with 3DGS-based neural rendering for efficient and expressive synthesis.

2.  We introduce a high-efficiency 3D face model compression scheme that achieves more than 7× compression, enabling efficient transmission at session initialization.

3.  Our method outperforms baselines in rate-distortion performance at low bitrates, supports over 170 fps rendering, and shows strong potential for multi-user 3D video conferencing under bandwidth constraints.

# Proposed Method

## Preliminaries

**Morphable Head Model.** FLAME is a linear statistical model that represents a 3D head mesh using identity parameters $`\beta`$, pose parameters $`\theta`$, and expression parameters $`\psi`$. The deformed template mesh is computed as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    T_P(\beta, \theta, \psi) = \overline{\mathbf{T}} + B_S(\beta; \mathcal{S}) + B_P(\theta; \mathcal{P}) + B_E(\psi; \mathcal{E}),
\end{equation}
```
where $`\overline{\mathbf{T}}`$ is the mean template, and $`B_S`$, $`B_P`$, $`B_E`$ are the shape, pose, and expression blendshapes, respectively.

**3D Gaussian Splatting.** 3DGS represents a 3D scene as a set of anisotropic Gaussians. Each Gaussian $`G(\boldsymbol{x})`$ is defined by its mean $`\mu`$ and covariance $`\Sigma`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    G(\boldsymbol{x})=e^{-\frac{1}{2}(\boldsymbol{x}-\boldsymbol{\mu})^{T} \Sigma^{-1}(\boldsymbol{x}-\boldsymbol{\mu})}.
\end{equation}
```
The covariance matrix $`\Sigma`$ can be further decomposed into scaling matrix $`S`$ and rotation matrix $`R`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \Sigma = RS{S}^T{R}^T.
\end{equation}
```
The final rendered color $`C`$ is computed by volume rendering:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    C = \sum_{i=1}^{n} c_i \alpha_i' \prod_{j=1}^{i-1} (1 - \alpha_j'),
\end{equation}
```
where $`c_i`$ is the color, and $`\alpha_i'`$ is the blending weight for the $`i`$-th Gaussian, which is computed from the opacity of the Gaussian.

## Overall Workflow

The system consists of a Encoder and Decoder, as illustrated in Fig <a href="#fig:overview" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:overview">1</a>. Our method encodes a 2D video of a talking face into two components: a pre-trained personalized face model and real-time extracted facial parameters (§<a href="#subsec:face" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:face">2.3</a>). Before the meeting, the receiver obtains the face model in advance. We employ a dedicated compression scheme to substantially reduce the model size, thus minimizing the pre-transmission time (§<a href="#subsec:compression" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec:compression">2.4</a>). During the meeting, only the compact facial parameters are transmitted instead of full face images to reduce transmission bitrate.

**Encoder Side.** We first utilize the real-time pose and expression estimation network proposed in to extract FLAME parameters from the input image:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \psi = E_\psi(I), \quad
    \theta = E_\theta(I),
\end{equation}
```
where $`E_\psi(I)`$ predicts the expression parameters $`\psi \in \mathbb{R}^{dim_{\psi}}`$, and $`E_\theta(I)`$ estimates the pose parameters $`\theta \in \mathbb{R}^{11}`$. These parameters are then quantized, predicted, and encoded using zero-order Exponential-Golomb coding to reduce inter-frame redundancy and generate the bitstream.

**Decoder Side.** The bitstream is first decoded using zero-order Exponential-Golomb decoding, followed by dequantization to recover the pose and expression parameters. The reconstructed parameters are then fed into the Neural Renderer to synthesize the talking face image.

## 3D Talking Face Representation and Driving

Our method leverages the parametric FLAME head model and the fast rendering capability of 3DGS, making it highly suitable for low-bitrate, real-time video conferencing applications. Inspired by , we represent the talking face using a fixed set of Gaussian points and expression-aware Gaussian offsets predicted by an offset network. Each Gaussian is parameterized as $`G = \{\mu, r, s, o, h\}`$, where the position $`\mu`$ is anchored on the FLAME mesh.

The offset network is an MLP $`F_\theta`$ that takes as input the mesh-based position $`\mu_M`$ and the expression parameters $`\psi`$, and outputs the offsets for the Gaussian spatial parameters:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \Delta\mu_\psi,\, \Delta r_\psi,\, \Delta s_\psi = F_\theta(\gamma(\mu_M), \psi),
\end{equation}
```
where $`\gamma`$ denotes positional encoding, following . The final Gaussian spatial parameters are then computed as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mu_\psi,\, r_\psi,\, s_\psi = (\mu_M \oplus \Delta\mu_\psi,\, r \oplus \Delta r_\psi,\, s \oplus \Delta s_\psi).
\end{equation}
```
To ensure real-time performance, we train the 3D talking face model using the FLAME parameters (expression $`\psi`$ and pose $`\theta`$) extracted by .

In our method, expression parameters account for the majority of the transmitted bitrate, reaching approximately 82% when using 50-dimensional expression parameters. Since FLAME expression parameters are derived from principal component analysis (PCA) , most facial variations can be effectively captured by only the first few principal components. Thus, we can reconstruct high-fidelity face images using only a subset of expression parameters, significantly reducing the bitrate with only a minor loss in reconstruction quality.

## Face Model Compression

<figure id="fig:model_compression" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="vcip2025/figure/model_compression.pdf" style="width:47.5%" />
<figcaption>Overview of the compact 3D Gaussian representation.</figcaption>
</figure>

Although only facial parameters are transmitted during conferencing, the facial model must be sent in advance. To reduce transmission and storage costs, we compress both components of our face model: the 3D Gaussian attributes and the MLP for attribute offsets.

**Compact 3D Gaussian Representation.** Unlike general 3DGS compression methods that prune or restructure Gaussian points, our approach fixes the number of points via UV sampling on the FLAME mesh, making pruning unnecessary. We therefore focus on compressing the Gaussian attribute values. The attributes include position $`\mu`$, base color $`h_{\text{base}}`$, high-order SH coefficients $`h_{\text{rest}}`$, scaling $`s`$, rotation $`r`$, and opacity $`o`$. Since $`\mu`$ is dynamically generated from the FLAME model and MLP offsets, only $`h_{\text{base}}`$, $`h_{\text{rest}}`$, $`s`$, $`r`$, and $`o`$ require compression.

For attributes less sensitive to precision, such as $`h_{\text{rest}}`$, $`r`$, and $`o`$, we follow and encode them as quantized latent vectors $`h_{\text{rest}}^{\text{ql}} \in \mathbb{R}^{\text{dim}_{\text{rest}}}`$, $`r^{\text{ql}} \in \mathbb{R}^{\text{dim}_{r}}`$ and $`o^{\text{ql}} \in \mathbb{R}^{\text{dim}_{o}}`$ , which are decoded by lightweight neural decoders. For precision-sensitive attributes, including $`h_{\text{base}}`$ and $`s`$, we apply direct quantization to obtain $`h_{\text{base}}^q`$ and $`s^q`$, followed by entropy coding. The final compact model consists of the latent vectors, their decoders, and the quantized $`h_{\text{base}}`$ and $`s`$. All components are further compressed using LZ77 for efficient storage and transmission. The decoding process of the Gaussian attributes is illustrated in Fig <a href="#fig:model_compression" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:model_compression">2</a>.

**MLP Compression.** To minimize the MLP size and avoid overfitting, we employ weight pruning and, if necessary, reduce the number of layers, followed by retraining to recover performance. The pruned MLP is then quantized to FP16 and compressed with LZ77 for further size reduction.

# Experiments

<figure id="fig:RD" data-latex-placement="htbp">
<figure>
<embed src="vcip2025/figure/gs_psnr_bitrate_avg_log.pdf" />
<figcaption>PSNR of x265 LDP at 14kbps is 24.06dB</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure>
<embed src="vcip2025/figure/gs_ssim_bitrate_avg_log.pdf" />
<figcaption>SSIM of x265 LDP at 14kbps is 0.802</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure>
<embed src="vcip2025/figure/gs_lpips_bitrate_avg_log.pdf" />
<figcaption>LPIPS of x265 LDP at 14kbps is 0.208</figcaption>
</figure>
<figcaption>Performance comparison between our methods, x265 LDP, and NeRF-based method. All videos are encoded at 25 fps. In our methods, “UC" denotes an uncompressed facial model, while “C" represents a compressed facial model. “8bits" and “10bits" indicate that facial parameters are quantized using 8-bit and 10-bit precision levels, respectively.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Implementation Details 

We evaluate our method on datasets provided by , featuring videos at a resolution of 512 × 512 with various identities. Each video contains approximately 2,500 frames, with the last 500 frames used for testing and the remaining frames for training. Additionally, we process our own dataset using a methodology similar to that of FlashAvatar . By default, we set $`\text{dim}_\psi = [10,20,30,40,50]`$, $`\text{dim}_{\text{rest}}=1`$, $`\text{dim}_{r} = 4`$, $`\text{dim}_o  = 1`$. All the experiments are tested on one single Nvidia GeForce RTX 4090 GPU.

## Performance Comparision

We compare our method with two baselines: the x265 encoder in LDP mode and a NeRF-based 3D talking face encoding approach . Our method is evaluated in two versions: (1) **Uncompressed**, where the talking face representation is not compressed, and (2) **Compressed**, where the representation undergoes compression. Additionally, we experiment with two quantization precisions for facial parameters (expression $`\psi`$ and pose $`\theta`$): **8-bit** and **10-bit**. Since our approach is designed for real-time extraction and generation in video conferencing scenarios, whereas methods such as are intended for reconstruction tasks and cannot accomplish video conferencing tasks, we do not include them in our comparisons.

To ensure fairness, all test videos for each method undergo uniform background replacement. For the x265 LDP baseline, we use the FFmpeg tool to encode the test videos into H.265 streams at specified bitrates. An example command is: `ffmpeg -i input -c:v libx265 -x265-params bframes=0 -b:v bitrate -r 25 output.` We adopt PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS as quantitative metrics to evaluate reconstruction quality.

As shown in Fig <a href="#fig:RD" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:RD">3</a>, our method achieves better rate-distortion performance than x265 LDP at bitrates below 40 kbps. It also outperforms the NeRF-based method under similar bitrates. Our method maintains high rendering fidelity even with reduced quantization precision (10 bit) and lower-dimensional expression parameters (10 dim), as most expressive information lies in the low-dimensional PCA subspace, with diminishing gains from higher dimensions.

In Fig <a href="#fig:zhuguan" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:zhuguan">4</a>, the bitrate used by x265 is more than three times higher than that of our method, yet its synthesized results are inferior, exhibiting obvious blocky artifacts.The NeRF-based method operates at a similar bitrate to ours, but fails to faithfully reconstruct fine details such as teeth and eyelids (as indicated by the green boxes), whereas our method preserves these details much better.

<figure id="fig:zhuguan" data-latex-placement="tbp">
<embed src="vcip2025/figure/obama_big2.pdf" />
<figcaption>The qualitative comparison results. X265 LDP exhibits blocking artifacts, NeRF-based method produces unrealistic details in teeth and eyelids regions. Our method generates high-fidelity results under various poses at a lower bitrates.</figcaption>
</figure>

<div id="tab:model_comparison">

| Method                 | Model Size (MB) | Speed (FPS) |
|:-----------------------|:---------------:|:-----------:|
| Ours_compressed        |    **0.59**     |     175     |
| Ours_uncompressed      |       4.3       |   **181**   |
| NeRF_based             |       180       |     25      |
| NeRF_based_compressed  |       16        |     25      |

Comparison of Model Size and Rendering Speed

</div>

<div id="tab:ablation">

| Method       | GS attributes |   MLP   | Total Size |   PSNR   |
|:-------------|:-------------:|:-------:|:----------:|:--------:|
| Uncompressed |    2.9 MB     | 1.4 MB  |   4.3 MB   | 33.45 dB |
| \+ LR        |    0.42 MB    | 1.4 MB  |  1.82 MB   | 33.39 dB |
| \+ MP        |    0.42 MB    | 0.9 MB  |  1.32 MB   | 33.37 dB |
| \+ QE        |    0.2 MB     | 0.5 MB  |   0.7 MB   | 33.3 dB  |
| \+ LZ77      |    0.17 MB    | 0.42 MB |  0.59 MB   | 33.3 dB  |

Ablation Study on Face Model Compression

</div>

As shown in Table <a href="#tab:model_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:model_comparison">1</a>, compared to the NeRF-based approach, our model is significantly smaller and renders much faster. After compression, our model size is reduced from 4.3 MB to just 0.59 MB, with a rendering frame rate exceeding 170 fps. In contrast, the compressed NeRF-based model still requires 18 MB and can only render at 25 fps. A smaller model size leads to shorter pre-transmission times, and a rendering speed exceeding 170 fps allows for real-time rendering for multiple users simultaneously, which is crucial for multi-user 3D video conferencing.

## Ablation Studies

We performed an ablation study on the compression components of our 3D facial model, as summarized in Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">2</a>:

- **Latent Representation (LR)**: Uses latent vectors to represent higher-order SH coefficients, rotation, and opacity for Gaussian attributes.

- **MLP Pruning (MP)**: Reduces the size of the MLP by pruning its weights.

- **Quantization and Entropy Coding (QE)**: Applies quantization and entropy coding to Gaussian attributes and uses FP16 for MLP parameters.

- **LZ77 Algorithm**: Further lossless compression.

As shown in the rightmost column of Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">2</a>, each component introduces only minimal PSNR loss. Overall, our compression reduces the model size from 4.3 MB to 0.59 MB, with just a 0.15 dB drop in rendering quality.

# Conclusion

This paper presents a lightweight, high-fidelity, and low-bitrate 3D talking face compression framework for real-time video conferencing. By integrating FLAME-based parametric modeling with 3DGS, our approach achieves high-fidelity facial representation at a low bitrate. Through Gaussian attribute compression and lightweight MLP optimization, we significantly reduce storage and bandwidth requirements without compromising visual quality. In the future, we plan to build a multi-user 3D video conferencing system and investigate its robustness under challenging network conditions.

# Acknowledgment

This work was partly supported by the NSFC62431015, Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality No.24511106200, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Shanghai Key Laboratory of Digital Media Processing and Transmission under Grant 22DZ2229005, 111 project BP0719010 and Ant Group Research Fund.

[^1]: $`^\ast`$ indicates Corresponding Authors

## References

1. Model-based image coding advanced video coding techniques for very low bit-rate applications
2. Generative face video coding techniques and standardization efforts: A review
3. A generative compression framework for low bandwidth video conference
4. Generative compression for face video: A hybrid scheme
5. AN ULTRA-LOW BITRATE VIDEO CONFERENCING SYSTEM WITH FLEXIBLE VIRTUAL ACCESS PATTERNS
6. Nerf based 3D generative video conferencing system
7. First order motion model for image animation
8. Semantic neural rendering-based video coding: Towards ultra-low bitrate video conferencing
9. Interactive face video coding: A generative compression framework [arXiv:2302.09919](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.09919)
10. Fsgan: Subject agnostic face swapping and reenactment
11. Technical overview of VP8, an open source video codec for the web
12. Overview of the scalable video coding extension of the H. 264/AVC standard
13. WebRTC: Real-Time Communication for the Web
14. Apple Vision Pro
15. What is XR? Towards a framework for augmented and virtual reality
16. Rtp: A transport protocol for real-time applications
17. An overview of core coding tools in the AV1 video codec
18. Overview of the high efficiency video coding (HEVC) standard
19. Learning a model of facial shape and expression from 4D scans.
20. Learning an animatable detailed 3D face model from in-the-wild images
21. Emoca: Emotion driven monocular face capture and animation
22. Towards metrical reconstruction of human faces
23. FlashAvatar: High-fidelity Head Avatar with Efficient Gaussian Embedding
24. Gaussianavatars: Photorealistic head avatars with rigged 3d gaussians
25. Headgas: Real-time animatable head avatars via 3d gaussian splatting
26. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis
27. A 3D face model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition
28. 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering.
29. Dynamic neural radiance fields for monocular 4d facial avatar reconstruction
30. Reconstructing personalized semantic facial nerf models from monocular video
31. Gaussian Head Avatar: Ultra High-fidelity Head Avatar via Dynamic Gaussians
32. Avatarmav: Fast 3d head avatar reconstruction using motion-aware neural voxels
33. The quic transport protocol: Design and internet-scale deployment
34. 3D Facial Expressions through Analysis-by-Neural-Synthesis
35. Searching for mobilenetv3
36. Eagles: Efficient accelerated 3d gaussians with lightweight encodings
37. Compression of individual sequences via variable-rate coding
38. A universal algorithm for sequential data compression
39. Robust high-resolution video matting with temporal guidance
40. Bisenet v2: Bilateral network with guided aggregation for real-time semantic segmentation
41. Robust estimation of a location parameter
42. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric
43. High-Fidelity Free-View Talking Head Synthesis for Low-Bandwidth Video Conference [doi:10.1109/VCIP59821.2023.10402733](https://doi.org/10.1109/VCIP59821.2023.10402733)
44. Lightgaussian: Unbounded 3d gaussian compression with 15x reduction and 200+ fps
45. Compact 3D Gaussian Representation for Radiance Field
46. Compressed 3D Gaussian Splatting for Accelerated Novel View Synthesis
47. Reducing the Memory Footprint of 3D Gaussian Splatting [doi:10.1145/3651282](https://doi.org/10.1145/3651282)
48. Mesongs: Post-training compression of 3d gaussians via efficient attribute transformation
49. Hac: Hash-grid assisted context for 3d gaussian splatting compression
50. Compact 3d scene representation via self-organizing gaussian grids
51. CompGS: Smaller and Faster Gaussian Splatting with Vector Quantization
52. Scaffold-GS: Structured 3D Gaussians for View-Adaptive Rendering
53. HEMGS: A Hybrid Entropy Model for 3D Gaussian Splatting Data Compression [arXiv:2411.18473](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.18473)
54. Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition [arXiv:1409.1556](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556)
55. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization [arXiv:1412.6980](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980)
56. VRVVC: Variable-Rate NeRF-Based Volumetric Video Compression
57. D-FCGS: Feedforward Compression of Dynamic Gaussian Splatting for Free-Viewpoint Videos [arXiv:2507.05859](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05859)
58. 3dgstream: On-the-fly training of 3d gaussians for efficient streaming of photo-realistic free-viewpoint videos
59. 4DGC: Rate-Aware 4D Gaussian Compression for Efficient Streamable Free-Viewpoint Video
60. A compression method for clustered bit-vectors
61. Analysis of a complex of statistical variables into principal components.
