---
arxiv_id: '2604.12292'
title: 'CoSyncDiT: Cognitive Synchronous Diffusion Transformer for Movie Dubbing'
authors:
- Gaoxiang Cong
- Liang Li
- Jiaxin Ye
- Zhedong Zhang
- Hongming Shan
- Yuankai Qi
- Qingming Huang
submitted: '2026-04-14'
categories:
- cs.SD
- cs.CV
- cs.MM
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.12292
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 54/244
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:10:57+00:00'
references_parsed: 244
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Movie Dubbing, also known as Visual Voice Cloning (V2C) , aims to generate a piece of speech for the character in silent videos based on the specified reference voice and textual scripts (as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:intro" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:intro">1</a>(a)). It promises significant potential in real-world applications such as film post-production, media production, and personal speech AIGC. Compared to traditional video-to-speech tasks , movie dubbing presents significantly greater challenges. Unlike merely inferring speech from visual cues, V2C must faithfully clone the reference acoustic timbre and accurately articulate the textual scripts aligned with dynamic lip motions in the video, while ensuring emotionally expressive and high-fidelity speech quality.

Previous works mainly focus on improving pronunciation clarity and prosody modeling. For instance, Speaker2Dubber  introduces a two-stage architecture by pre-training on the clean TTS corpus to improve clarity. Then, ProDubber  employs a prosody-enhanced pre-training paradigm on the larger corpus. Recently, InstructDubber  integrates pre-trained TTS framework with LLM-driven emotion instructions to predict pitch and energy variations. However, these methods rely on TTS architecture and predict integer-scaled durations for each phoneme (as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:intro" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:intro">1</a>(b)), failing to achieve the precise lip-sync required for dubbing. Some dubbing methods  attempt to introduce duration-level contrastive learning between phoneme and lip sequences to improve alignment. Nevertheless, these methods still depend on an external forced tool (*e.g*.., Montreal Forced Aligner ) to extract ground-truth duration boundaries for identifying positive samples during contrastive learning. This rigidly restricts the pronunciation to predefined intervals, damaging the naturalness and expressiveness of the generated speech .

<figure id="fig:intro" data-latex-placement="tb">
<embed src="Figs/ECCV_Intro_V3.4.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption> (a) Illustration of Visual Voice Cloning (V2C) task. (b) Explicit alignment manner requires an external forced tool to compute the ground-truth duration of each phoneme in advance. (c) Implicit alignment eliminates the dependency on external forced tools. (d) We propose a movie dubbing architecture built upon CoSync-DiT, which is structured around a cognitively inspired listen–watch–articulate paradigm to progressively guide the denoising trajectory in flow matching. </figcaption>
</figure>

Recently, AlignDiT  has represented a significant leap forward in the field by eliminating the need for external forced alignment tools and adopting an implicit alignment modeling approach. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:intro" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:intro">1</a>(c), it fuses text with complementary-masked audio and visual features via cross-attention across every layer of the diffusion transformer. However, this strategy compels the text to simultaneously align all signals, rendering the overall alignment highly susceptible to interference from the early segments of the reference audio, particularly during an in-the-wild scenario. Furthermore, uniformly applying text cross-attention across all DiT layers can complicate the alignment dynamics, potentially compromising both timbre and pronunciation clarity.

In this paper, we propose a novel flow matching-based movie dubbing framework built upon **Co**gnitive **Sync**hronous **Di**ffusion **T**ransformer (**CoSync-DiT**), which progressively guides a noise-to-speech generative trajectory to effectively resolve the demands of high-fidelity style cloning and exact audio-visual synchronization. Inspired by the dubbing workflow of professional actors , our method is structured around a sequential cognitive process of listening, watching, and articulating. Rather than treat all transformer layers homogeneously, CoSync-DiT partitions the denoising generation within flow matching into three distinct phases (as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:intro" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:intro">1</a>(d)). First, we initialize a unified acoustic-semantic prior. Then, the model leverages multi-head self-attention to capture the acoustic style and establish its relationship with the text, without any visual interference. Second, we inject fine-grained visual information through residual connections using a zero-initialized learnable gate. This step calibrates the previously acquired acoustic representations to capture temporal dynamics. Third, we design a time-aware context aligning layer to yield correct articulation by implicitly retrieving the linguistic context based on second phase. Finally, we introduce a Joint Semantic and Alignment Regularization (JSAR) mechanism to further rectify the third phase. This approach innovatively applies frame-level contrastive learning to the queried contextual outputs to enforce strict temporal alignment, while ensuring semantic constraints on the DiT hidden states.

**Our key contributions are**: **(1)** We propose CoSync-DiT, a novel flow matching-based framework for movie dubbing. By formulating the denoising generation as a cognitively synchronous process, it progressively guides the vector field estimation through three sequential phases: acoustic style adapting, fine-grained visual calibrating, and time-aware context aligning. **(2)** We design the JSAR mechanism to enforce frame-level temporal consistency on intermediate context outputs and semantic consistency on final flow hidden states, thereby stabilizing the generative trajectory and enhancing context alignment. **(3)** Our method performs favourably against state-of-the-art methods on three public datasets, including the challenging in-the-wild movie dubbing scenarios.

# Related Work

## Visual Voice cloning

V2C  has recently attracted widespread attention and promises a profound impact on film production  and digital media . V2C aims to generate synchronized speech for silent videos conditioned on a specific reference timbre. Early methods widely adopt explicit duration prediction to achieve lip synchronization. For instance, StyleDubber  queries lip motions using textual phonemes to construct a phoneme-level visual sequence and predicts the duration of each phoneme. ProDubber  and InstructDubber  follow a similar paradigm. By enforcing explicit duration boundaries, these approaches typically guarantee high pronunciation clarity. However, they inherently struggle to achieve precise lip synchronization because the predicted durations must be expanded into rigid integer multiples. Recent methods  introduce duration-level contrastive learning to alleviate this limitation. Nevertheless, they still rely on external forced aligners to extract duration intervals. In this paper, drawing inspiration from the human cognitive workflow, we propose CoSync-DiT, a novel implicit dubbing framework that completely eliminates the dependency on external aligners. It ensures high-fidelity timbre cloning and accurate lip synchronization, even in challenging in-the-wild dubbing scenarios.

## Flow Matching and Generative Modeling

Flow matching  has emerged as a dominant paradigm in generative modeling due to its superior quality and inference speed. It learns a vector field  to transport samples from a simple prior distribution to the target data distribution along efficient probability paths. In TTS field, flow matching has found extensive applications . However, these methods cannot parse visual scenes and fail to achieve fine-grained lip-sync, hindering their application in movie dubbing. FlowDubber  introduces a dual contrastive learning, which relies on external forced aligners and employs a monotonic search algorithm for sequential expansion. Nevertheless, even minor initial misalignments tend to compound throughout the generation process and degrade the lip-sync quality. AlignDiT  implicitly models this alignment by incorporating cross-attention modules across all transformer layers. However, due to its complementary masking strategy, the model struggles to simultaneously align with the reference audio and the target lip motions. This homogeneous injection across all layers further exacerbates alignment instability in complex dubbing scenarios. In this paper, we propose CoSync-DiT to progressively guide the denoising trajectory by executing acoustic style adapting, fine-grained visual calibrating, and time-aware context aligning. Furthermore, we design the JSAR mechanism to learn temporal consistency and semantic consistency.

# Methodology

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:archi" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:archi">2</a>, the overall framework of our method includes the following parts. First, individual encoders extract the foundational representations from the reference audio, silent video, and dubbing scripts. Next, under the Optimal-Transport Conditional Flow Matching (OT-CFM) paradigm, the proposed CoSync-DiT first takes Gaussian noise, masked acoustic conditions, and semantic conditions as priors to execute Acoustic Style Adapting. Sequentially, the Fine-grained Visual Calibrating focuses on capturing the rhythmic dynamics of lip motion. Next, a Time-aware Context Aligning module integrates the textual features to ensure precise audio-visual synchronization. Finally, the designed JSAR mechanism regularizes the alignment stage through semantic and temporal consistency constraints, guiding the generative trajectory toward synchronized and high-fidelity speech.

<figure id="fig:archi" data-latex-placement="tb">
<embed src="Figs/ECCV_Method.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption> The overview of architecture </figcaption>
</figure>

## Acoustic and Semantic Prior

The reference audio $`R_{a}`$ is extracted to a raw mel-spectrogram $`m_{raw} \in \mathbb{R}^{F \times L}`$, where $`F`$ is the mel dimension and $`L`$ is the sequence length. A binary temporal mask $`\mathbf{M}_b \in \{0, 1\}^{L}`$ is then applied to obscure the target region $`\eta`$. This enables the model to yield the masked acoustic features $`\mathcal{H}_{m}= (1 - \mathbf{M}_b) \odot m_{raw}`$. Unlike directly concatenating the masked visual features, we construct a unified sequence by jointly modeling text and $`\mathcal{H}_{m}`$. To expand the word-level text sequence to the mel-level, we adopt two expansion strategies: (1) a padding operation to preserve the complete linguistic content; (2) a cross-attention operation to provide coarse temporal priors. Finally, we concatenate these textual sequences and $`\mathcal{H}_{m}`$ into the semantic-acoustic prior, rather than using raw visual signals for early-stage conditioning.

## CoSync-DiT

Traditional Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) struggle to meet the strict demands of movie dubbing. They fail to maintain precise audio-visual synchronization, degrading both timbre fidelity and pronunciation clarity. Drawing inspiration from the human dubbing cognitive process, we propose the Cognitive Synchronous Diffusion Transformer (CoSync-DiT). The model learns to progressively establish the reference speaker’s style, perform fine-grained lip calibration, and enforce contextual alignment.

**Stage 1: Acoustic Style Adapting.** In the scope of OT-CFM, our model predicts the vector field mapping from a standard Gaussian noise distribution $`x_0 \sim \mathcal{N}(0, I)`$ to the target speech latent $`x_1`$, following the time-dependent path $`x_t = (1 - t)x_0 + t x_1`$. In stage 1, the model concatenates the noisy speech $`x_t`$ and the semantic-acoustic prior by unified projection layer to form the initial sequence $`\mathcal{Z}^0`$. The Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) models the long-range dependencies in the initial hidden states to capture style information:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{Z}^{l}_{style} = \mathcal{Z}^{l-1} + \alpha_{1}^l(t) \odot \mathrm{MHSA} ( \mathrm{AdaLN}_{\beta_1,\gamma_1}(\mathcal{Z}^{l-1}, t)),
\end{equation}
```
where $`l`$ represents the current block level. $`\mathrm{AdaLN}_{\beta_1,\gamma_1}`$ applies Time-Adaptive Layer Normalization (Time-AdaLN) to modulate the input feature statistics via scale $`\gamma_1`$ and shift $`\beta_1`$ vectors driven by the current time $`t`$. The gating term $`\alpha_1(t)`$ controls the residual contribution. Similarly, a time-adaptive Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) further refines these features via non-linear dimensional transformations to consolidate the relationship between acquired acoustic style and text.

**Stage 2: Fine-grained Visual Calibrating.** The input silent video is first processed by a lip-motion encoder to extract the raw lip features $`\mathcal{X}_{raw}`$. Then, $`\mathcal{X}_{raw}`$ is then passed through a cascaded upsampling layer to yield the refined visual representations $`\mathcal{X}_{lip}`$, ensuring their temporal resolution strictly matches that of the target mel-spectrogram. Next, $`\mathcal{X}_{lip}`$ are seamlessly injected into the $`\mathcal{Z}^{l}_{style}`$ via a zero-initialized learnable gate:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{Z}^{l}_{lip} = \mathcal{Z}^{l}_{style} + \Lambda^l \odot \mathcal{X}_{lip}, \quad \text{where } \Lambda^l = \mathbf{0} \in \mathbb{R}^{d}.
\end{equation}
```
This gating mechanism $`\Lambda^l`$ ensures that the visual injection acts as a subtle rhythmic residual, providing fine-grained frame-level calibration while protecting previously established style information.

**Stage 3: Time-aware Context Aligning.** We place the Multi-Head Cross-Attention (MHCA) at the bottom of the architecture to ensure that text alignment operates on fully mature visual-acoustic representations, rather than forcing a premature and unstable complementary fusion. Furthermore, we introduce a time-aware mechanism, $`\mathrm{AdaLN}_{\beta_3,\gamma_3}`$, to modulate the cross-attention process, allowing the alignment dynamics to better adapt to the evolving flow states:

``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{Z}^{l}_{out} = \mathcal{Z}^{l}_{lip} + \alpha_{3}^l(t) \odot ( \mathrm{MHCA} ( \mathrm{AdaLN}_{\beta_3,\gamma_3}(\mathcal{Z}^{l}_{lip}, t), \mathcal{H}_{text})),
\label{context_MHCA}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\alpha_{3}^l(t)`$ controls the residual contribution of the cross-attention output according to the current timestep $`t`$. The textual representation $`\mathcal{H}_{text}`$ extracted by ConvNeXtV2 encoder  serves as both the Key and Value, encouraging the generative path to converge toward the aligned content by implicitly retrieving the linguistic context.

## Joint Semantic and Alignment Regularization

While the OT-CFM efficiently constructs the data generation path, the unconstrained vector field estimation often leads to temporal misalignments. In this work, we introduce the Joint Semantic and Alignment Regularization (JSAR) mechanism, constraining both the final flow hidden states and the intermediate context representations.

**Alignment Regularization.** The intermediate context representations (*i.e*.., the output of the MHCA in Eq. <a href="#context_MHCA" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="context_MHCA">[context_MHCA]</a>, denoted as $`\hat{\mathcal{Z}}_{ca}`$) need to maintain inherent temporal consistency when queried by the flow hidden features. To implicitly align these context representations in time, we introduce a frame-level contrastive learning by employing the audio branch representations from a pre-trained AV-HuBERT (denoted as $`\mathcal{F}_{av}`$) as the contrastive ground truth. Both the outputs $`\hat{\mathcal{Z}}_{ca}`$ and the AV-HuBERT features $`\mathcal{F}_{av}`$ are then L2-normalized along the feature dimension. Then, it uses the InfoNCE objective to maximize the cosine similarity of matching temporal frames while repelling non-matching frames:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{CL} = - \frac{1}{N} \sum_{i=1}^{N} \log \frac{\exp \left( \langle \hat{z}_{ca}^{(i)}, f_{av}^{(i)} \rangle / \tau \right)}{\sum_{j=1}^{N} \exp \left( \langle \hat{z}_{ca}^{(i)}, f_{av}^{(j)} \rangle / \tau \right)},
\end{equation}
```
where $`\hat{z}_{ca}^{(i)}`$ and $`f_{av}^{(i)}`$ represent the $`i`$-th frame of the flattened $`\hat{\mathcal{Z}}_{ca}`$ and $`\mathcal{F}_{av}`$ respectively, $`\langle \cdot, \cdot \rangle`$ denotes the dot product, and $`\tau`$ is the temperature hyperparameter.

**Semantic Regularization.** To guarantee pronunciation correctness, we apply a Connectionist Temporal Classification (CTC) $`\mathcal{L}_{ctc}`$ loss directly to the final hidden features $`\mathcal{Z}^l_{out}`$ (*i.e*.., the output of Eq. <a href="#context_MHCA" data-reference-type="eqref" data-reference="context_MHCA">[context_MHCA]</a>). It encourages the model to retain more linguistic information in predicted hidden states. By jointly optimizing these objectives within the JSAR framework, the model effectively synchronizes the context with the acoustic dynamics and maintains semantic consistency, stably anchoring the flow matching trajectory.

## Optimal-Transport Conditional Flow Matching Objective

The objective of the OT-CFM is to minimize the Mean Squared Error (MSE) between the predicted vector field by CoSync-DiT and the target vector field:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{fm} = \mathbb{E}_{t, q(x_1), p(x_0)} [ || v_\theta(x_t | t, \mathcal{H}_{m}, \mathcal{X}_{lip}, \mathcal{H}_{text}) - (x_1 - x_0) ||^2 ],
\end{equation}
```
where $`t \sim \mathcal{U}[0, 1]`$ is the timestep, and $`x_1 \sim q(x_1)`$ denotes the target mel-spectrogram latent. $`x_t`$ represents the intermediate noise latent. $`v_\theta`$ represents the vector field predicted by the proposed CoSync-DiT with model parameters $`\theta`$, which is progressively conditioned on the $`\mathcal{H}_{m}`$, $`\mathcal{X}_{lip}`$, and $`\mathcal{H}_{text}`$.

## Acoustic-Semantic Classifier-Free Guidance

In conditional flow matching, classifier-free guidance (CFG)  is typically employed to amplify the influence of the conditioning signals. Driven by acoustic and semantic prior, our CFG focuses on explicitly decoupling these conditions. Let $`\mathcal{C}`$ denote the joint condition comprising both acoustic and semantic, and $`\varnothing`$ denote the unconditional prior. The modified vector field is formulated as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    v_{t,cfg}= v_t(x_t, \mathcal{C}) + \lambda_{a}
    \cdot(v_{t}(x_t, \mathcal{C})-v_t(x_t, \mathcal{H}_{m})) 
     + \lambda_{s} 
    \cdot(v_{t}(x_t, \mathcal{H}_{m})-v_t(x_t,\varnothing )), 
\label{final_cfg}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\lambda_{a}`$ and $`\lambda_{s}`$ are the acoustic and semantic guidance scales, enabling a highly controllable dubbing generation.

# Experiments

## Datasets and Experimental Setup

In this paper, we conduct experiments on three dubbing datasets, encompassing diverse in-the-wild scenarios (*e.g*.., live action movies, vlogs, and dramas) as well as traditional scenarios. Tab. <a href="#tab_1_Setting_CleanExplanation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab_1_Setting_CleanExplanation">1</a> summarizes the evaluation settings: (1) **Setting 1**: ground-truth speech is used as reference; (2) **Setting 2**: a different clip from the same speaker serves as reference; (3) **Zero-shot**: both unseen voice and unseen video are evaluated by out-of-domain dubbing dataset.

**Chemistry Lecture (Chem).** This single-speaker dataset  features a chemistry teacher delivering educational classroom lectures. It comprises short video segments sourced from YouTube and encompasses approximately nine hours of total video content. Following the standard sentence-level pre-processing , the dataset yields 6,132 training samples and 196 testing samples for dubbing.

**CelebV-Dub.** Built upon the foundations of CelebV-HQ  and CelebV-Text , this dataset aggregates content from diverse sources such as vlogs and dramas. It serves as a distinctly challenging benchmark by featuring unconstrained real-world settings alongside rich emotional variations. Following the official division , this dataset provides 79,933 training samples and 213 testing samples.

**CinePile-Dub.** Derived from the original CinePile  dataset, CinePile-Dub is specifically curated from professional live-action movie productions. It features high emotional intensity and expressive acting-specific prosody characteristic of authentic cinematic environments. Specifically, it comprises 160 professional movie video clips exclusively reserved to rigorously evaluate dubbing performance in a zero-shot setting.

<div id="tab_1_Setting_CleanExplanation">

| Dataset | Speaker | Main Scenes | Experiment Setting |  |  |  |  |  |
|:---|:---|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| CelebV-Dub  | Multi-Speakers | Vlogs, Dramas | Setting 1 & 2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| Chem  | Single-Speaker | Teaching Video | Setting 1 & 2 |  |  |  |  |  |
| CinePile-Dub  | Multi-Speakers | Live Action Movies | Zero-shot Setting |  |  |  |  |  |

Overview of evaluation configurations across three experimental settings in various dubbing benchmarks.

</div>

<span id="tab_1_Setting_CleanExplanation" label="tab_1_Setting_CleanExplanation"></span>

## Evaluation Metrics

We adopt several authority metrics to comprehensively evaluate various aspects of generated dubbing.

**WER** measures pronunciation clarity by calculating the word error rate derived from an automatic speech recognition model, whisper-large-V3  .

**EMOSIM** measures emotion similarity. We compute the cosine similarity between the synthesized speech and the ground truth by the Emotion2Vec model , which is a universal speech emotion representation model.

**SPKSIM** measures speaker similarity. In contrast to the prior metric in , *i.e*.., speaker encoder cosine similarity (SECS) by GE2E model , we adopt the WavLM-TDNN model , which is widely adopted in speaker verification to ensure a reliable measure .

**Sync-KL** also known as duration divergence . Since visual-based alignment metrics (*e.g*.., AVSync  and LSE ) still suffer from the complex visual changes and perturbations in in-the-wild scenarios, Sync-KL offers a more reliable manner by directly quantifying the duration discrepancy between GT and generated speech, leveraging the fact that GT speech is naturally synchronized with video. We will provide further comparisons of AV-Sync in the supplementary materials.

**DNSMOS** is used to objectively evaluate speech quality by approximating subjective human ratings (Mean Opinion Score, MOS). DNSMOS  (Deep Noise Suppression MOS) assesses speech clarity and background noise cleanliness.

**MOS-N and MOS-S**. We will provide human subjective rating results in supplementary materials, including MOS-N (Naturalness) and MOS-S (Similarity).

## Implementation Details

The input and output dimensions of the unified projection layer are 712 and 1,024, respectively. ConvPosition is used to inject positional information into the unified projection layer with a kernel size of 31 and 16 groups. CoSync-DiT consists of 22 layers. The multi-head self-attention and multi-head cross-attention layers both have a hidden dimension of 1,024 with 16 attention heads. Lip regions are resized to $`96 \times 96`$ and processed by a pre-trained AV-HuBERT  model to extract 1,024-dimensional embeddings. The text encoder comprises a stack of four ConvNeXt V2 blocks with a hidden dimension of 512. In JSAR, the temperature parameter $`\tau`$ is set to 0.07. The CTC projection layer within JSAR includes two temporal downsampling layers with Mish activations to map the 1,024-dimensional features into a 2,547-dimensional space. The final projection layer maps the 1,024-dimensional features to a predicted 100-dimensional vector field. During inference, the predicted vector field is used to solve the ODE from Gaussian noise to the target mel-spectrogram using an Euler solver with 32 function evaluations. We optimize the model using the AdamW optimizer  with momentum parameters $`\beta_1=0.9`$ and $`\beta_2=0.999`$. The decoupled weight decay is set to 0.01, and the epsilon term is $`1 \times 10^{-8}`$. A random 70% to 100% span of mel-spectrogram frames is masked with span length $`\eta`$.

## Performance Comparison with SOTA Methods

<div class="table*">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 100.00 | 3.85 | 100.00 | 0.00 | 3.86 |
| HPMDubbing  (CVPR’23) | 57.05 | 17.52 | 78.80 | 0.477 | 3.34 |
| StyleDubber  (ACL’24) | 61.87 | 10.62 | 80.95 | 0.440 | 3.39 |
| EmoDubber  (CVPR’25) | 75.60 | 11.86 | 85.10 | 0.420 | 3.70 |
| FlowDubber  (MM’25) | 75.37 | 11.51 | 83.47 | 0.417 | 3.66 |
| HD-Dubber (TPAMI’25) | 64.78 | 14.23 | 79.59 | 0.410 | 3.60 |
| AlignDiT  (MM’25) | 72.73 | 12.39 | 86.28 | 0.349 | 3.80 |
| Produbber  (CVPR’25) | 38.55 | 9.45 | 77.93 | 0.464 | 3.62 |
| InstructDub  (AAAI’26) | 42.10 | 8.86 | 80.99 | 0.431 | 3.82 |
| Ours | **81.84** | **7.04** | **87.84** | **0.289** | **3.83** |

<span id="result_Chem_s1" label="result_Chem_s1"></span>

</div>

<div class="table*">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 73.01 | 3.85 | 100.00 | 0.00 | 3.86 |
| HPMDubbing  (CVPR’23) | 44.67 | 18.48 | 77.49 | 0.458 | 3.33 |
| StyleDubber  (ACL’24) | 50.00 | 11.98 | 79.09 | 0.426 | 3.34 |
| EmoDubber  (CVPR’25) | 67.53 | 12.01 | 79.41 | 0.427 | 3.71 |
| FlowDubber  (MM’25) | 60.61 | 15.24 | 78.95 | 0.411 | 3.66 |
| HD-Dubber (TPAMI’25) | 52.70 | 14.80 | 77.77 | 0.430 | 3.59 |
| AlignDiT  (MM’25) | 64.08 | 13.28 | 83.76 | 0.349 | 3.82 |
| Produbber  (CVPR’25) | 26.87 | 11.69 | 77.42 | 0.412 | 3.53 |
| InstructDub  (AAAI’26) | 35.31 | 8.46 | 78.48 | 0.433 | 3.83 |
| Ours | **72.29** | **8.43** | **87.06** | **0.288** | **3.84** |

<span id="result_Chem_s2" label="result_Chem_s2"></span>

</div>

**Results on the Chem (Setting 1)**. As shown in Tab. <a href="#result_Chem_s1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_Chem_s1">[result_Chem_s1]</a>, our proposed CoSync-DiT achieves the best performance across all evaluated metrics. Under Setting 1, it attains 81.84% in SPKSIM, surpassing the second-best EmoDubber by an absolute margin of 6.24%, demonstrating exceptional capability in high-fidelity speaker preservation. Furthermore, our method achieves 87.84% in EMOSIM and the lowest WER of 7.04%, validating the effectiveness of our time-aware context aligning and semantic consistency constraints for precise pronunciation modeling. Finally, the lowest Sync-KL score of 0.289 and the highest DNSMOS of 3.83 among all dubbing baselines further confirm its superior fine-grained audio-visual synchronization and premium acoustic clarity.

**Results on the Chem (Setting 2)**. As presented in Tab. <a href="#result_Chem_s2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_Chem_s2">[result_Chem_s2]</a>, we further evaluate the models under the distinctly more challenging Setting 2 scenario. Despite the increased difficulty, our proposed CoSync-DiT consistently maintains its superiority across all evaluated metrics. Specifically, it achieves 72.29% in SPKSIM, outperforming the second-best EmoDubber by an absolute margin of 4.76% and remarkably approaching the Ground Truth upper bound of 73.01%. This demonstrates the exceptional robustness of our acoustic style adapting phase in capturing complex unseen timbres. Furthermore, our method yields the highest EMOSIM of 87.06% and the lowest WER of 8.43%. Finally, CoSync-DiT attains the exceptionally low Sync-KL score of 0.288 and a remarkable DNSMOS of 3.84, confirming that our fine-grained visual calibrating module effectively guarantees strict audio-visual synchronization without sacrificing premium acoustic fidelity.

**Results on the CelebV-Dub (Setting 1)**. Results are reported in Tab. <a href="#result_CelebVDub_S1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_CelebVDub_S1">2</a>. Compared with relatively controlled datasets like Chem, CelebV-Dub contains diverse in-the-wild content such as vlogs and dramas with rich emotional variations, posing a distinctly more challenging evaluation. Despite these complexities, our proposed CoSync-DiT successfully achieves state-of-the-art performance across all evaluated metrics. Specifically, it attains 65.21% in SPKSIM, outperforming the strongest baseline AlignDiT by an absolute margin of 5.50%, which confirms the reliability of our acoustic style adapting phase in handling highly expressive speech. Furthermore, our method obtains the highest EMOSIM of 84.61% alongside an exceptionally low WER of 4.29%, closely approaching the Ground Truth limit of 4.15%. Finally, securing the lowest Sync-KL score of 0.392 and the highest DNSMOS of 3.46 proves that our framework consistently delivers precise audio-visual synchronization and premium acoustic fidelity even in challenging dubbing scenarios.

<div id="result_CelebVDub_S1">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 100.00 | 4.15 | 100.00 | 0.000 | 3.38 |
| HPMDubbing  (CVPR’23) | 17.26 | 21.99 | 73.01 | 0.441 | 2.47 |
| StyleDubber (ACL’24) | 26.39 | 10.79 | 79.38 | 0.415 | 2.65 |
| EmoDubber  (CVPR’25) | 22.08 | 13.44 | 76.59 | 0.407 | 3.26 |
| FlowDubber  (MM’25) | 22.24 | 13.95 | 76.76 | 0.423 | 3.27 |
| Produbber  (CVPR’25) | 26.97 | 5.18 | 73.49 | 0.421 | 3.12 |
| HD-Dubber  (TPAMI’25) | 10.96 | 66.30 | 19.73 | 0.410 | 3.01 |
| AlignDiT  (MM’25) | 59.71 | 9.48 | 84.54 | 0.402 | 3.45 |
| InstructDub  (AAAI’26) | 29.12 | 6.13 | 75.57 | 0.429 | 3.16 |
| Ours | **65.21** | **4.29** | **84.61** | **0.392** | **3.46** |

Compared with SOTA Dubbing methods on the CelebV-Dub dataset under Setting 1. Unlike single dubbing scenario (*e.g*.., Chem), CelebV-Dub includes diverse video content (vlogs and dramas) with highly expressive speech.

</div>

<span id="result_CelebVDub_S1" label="result_CelebVDub_S1"></span>

<div id="result_CelebVDub_S2">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 66.13 | 4.15 | 100.00 | 0.000 | 3.38 |
| HPMDubbing  (CVPR’23) | 12.52 | 23.64 | 69.25 | 0.447 | 2.47 |
| StyleDubber   (ACL’24) | 19.42 | 7.03 | 74.87 | 0.405 | 2.63 |
| EmoDubber  (CVPR’25) | 18.78 | 16.37 | 76.30 | 0.422 | 3.30 |
| FlowDubber  (MM’25) | 19.32 | 14.94 | 74.18 | 0.420 | 3.31 |
| Produbber  (CVPR’25) | 23.13 | 6.41 | 71.38 | 0.432 | 3.14 |
| HD-Dubber (TPAMI’25) | 9.69 | 64.71 | 16.86 | 0.400 | 3.00 |
| AlignDiT   (MM’25) | 49.49 | 13.18 | 79.69 | 0.413 | **3.47** |
| InstructDub  (AAAI’26) | 22.85 | **5.64** | 74.03 | 0.434 | 3.18 |
| Ours | **53.44** | 6.39 | **80.29** | **0.381** | **3.47** |

Compared with SOTA methods on the CelebV-Dub dataset under Setting 2.

</div>

<span id="result_CelebVDub_S2" label="result_CelebVDub_S2"></span>

**Results on the CelebV-Dub (Setting 2)**. Finally, we evaluate the models on the CelebV-Dub dataset under Setting 2. As shown in Tab. <a href="#result_CelebVDub_S2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_CelebVDub_S2">3</a>, our CoSync-DiT achieves the highest SPKSIM of 53.44% and EMOSIM of 80.29%, demonstrating robust acoustic style adapting capabilities for complex unseen voices. While InstructDub attains a marginally lower Word Error Rate of 5.64%, it severely compromises speaker identity preservation by yielding a remarkably low SPKSIM of 22.85%. In contrast, our method maintains a highly competitive WER of 6.39% while simultaneously establishing the best audio-visual synchronization with a Sync-KL of 0.381. Furthermore, achieving the highest DNSMOS score of 3.47 confirms that our dubbing method avoids the pitfall of single-metric over-optimization, providing the most comprehensive and balanced dubbing quality.

<div id="Zero-shot-CinePile">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 100.00 | 2.56 | 100.00 | 0.00 | 3.15 |
| HPMDubbing (CVPR’23) | 42.72 | 99.20 | 61.22 | 0.391 | 3.23 |
| StyleDubber (ACL’24) | 41.65 | 74.96 | 63.88 | 0.362 | 2.89 |
| HD-Dubber \](TPAMI’25) | 5.84 | 42.75 | 56.32 | 0.337 | 2.58 |
| EmoDubber (CVPR’25) | 23.10 | 49.57 | 70.08 | 0.337 | 3.05 |
| FlowDubber (MM’25) | 22.68 | 54.41 | 67.39 | 0.354 | 3.04 |
| AlignDiT (MM’25) | 58.90 | 20.98 | 77.39 | 0.342 | 3.36 |
| ProDubber (CVPR’25) | 28.86 | 5.25 | 70.35 | 0.335 | 2.93 |
| InstructDub (AAAI’26) | 27.61 | **4.61** | 65.97 | 0.370 | 2.95 |
| Ours | **60.04** | 5.59 | **77.41** | **0.332** | **3.40** |

Zero-shot main experiment results on CinePile-Dub dataset (Out-of-Domain). All models are trained on the training set of the basic dubbing dataset CelebV-Dub.

</div>

<span id="Zero-shot-CinePile" label="Zero-shot-CinePile"></span>

**Results on the CinePile-Dub (Zero-shot Setting).** To assess true zero-shot generalization, we conduct an out-of-domain evaluation where models trained exclusively on CelebV-Dub are tested on CinePile-Dub, a highly challenging real-world live-action movie dataset. As presented in Tab. <a href="#Zero-shot-CinePile" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Zero-shot-CinePile">4</a>, our proposed CoSync-DiT achieves the highest SPKSIM of 60.04% and EMOSIM of 77.41%. This confirms the powerful cross-domain extrapolation capacity of the proposed method when confronted with entirely novel cinematic environments. Although InstructDub attains the lowest Word Error Rate of 4.61%, it experiences a catastrophic collapse in speaker identity preservation by yielding a poor SPKSIM of 27.61%. Conversely, our method maintains a highly competitive WER of 5.59% while simultaneously establishing the best speaker similarity 60.04% and audio-visual synchronization with a leading Sync-KL score of 0.332.

<figure id="fig:NFE" data-latex-placement="!tb">
<embed src="Figs/Visualization.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption> Performance comparison between the proposed method and the SOTA baseline under the different Number of Function Evaluations (NFE) steps. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Ablation Study

To validate the effectiveness of our core designs, we conduct a comprehensive ablation study on the CelebV-Dub dataset under Setting 2. As reported in Tab. <a href="#Ab_Study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Ab_Study">5</a>, removing the acoustic style adapting phase triggers a severe collapse in speaker similarity, plummeting the SPKSIM from 53.44% to 19.64%. This confirms its indispensable role in capturing and preserving the target timbre. When the fine-grained visual calibrating module is omitted, the Sync-KL metric clearly degrades to 0.419, indicating its absolute necessity for establishing strict lip-sync. Furthermore, we find that the absence of the time-aware context aligning phase exerts the most profound impact on overall synchronization, as its core function relies on re-retrieving textual content conditioned on previously integrated information to adjust articulation. Finally, we dissect the JSAR mechanism. Eliminating the semantic consistency constraint primarily damages the pronunciation accuracy, dropping the temporal consistency constraint strictly deteriorates the audio-visual synchronization, and discarding the entire JSAR framework compounds both errors.

<div id="Ab_Study">

| Methods | SPKSIM (%) $`\uparrow`$ | WER (%) $`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM (%) $`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL $`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS $`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| w/o Style Adapting | 19.64 | 6.84 | 77.24 | 0.385 | 3.38 |
| w/o Visual Calibrating | 53.25 | 6.40 | 80.17 | 0.419 | 3.45 |
| w/o Context Aligning | 52.75 | 7.39 | 80.04 | 0.446 | 3.44 |
| w/o JSAR | 51.30 | 8.72 | 80.14 | 0.431 | 3.39 |
| w/o Semantic Consistency | 52.34 | 8.39 | 80.19 | 0.392 | 3.42 |
| w/o Temporal Consistency | 51.37 | 6.58 | 80.24 | 0.425 | 3.44 |
| Full model | **53.44** | **6.39** | **80.29** | **0.381** | **3.47** |

Results of ablation study on CelebV-Dub dataset under Setting 2.

</div>

<span id="Ab_Study" label="Ab_Study"></span>

<figure id="fig:Visual" data-latex-placement="!tb">
<embed src="Figs/Visual5.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption> Visual comparison of the generated mel-spectrograms. The blue arrows highlight specific regions requiring attention for audio-visual synchronization. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Comprehensive Analysis of Generative Robustness

To comprehensively evaluate the inference efficiency and generation stability of our approach against the state-of-the-art baseline, we conduct a comparative analysis under various Number of Function Evaluations (NFE) settings. As illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:NFE" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:NFE">3</a>, AlignDiT suffers a catastrophic performance collapse at extremely low sampling steps, evidenced by its SIM-O metric plummeting to approximately 0.30 at an NFE of 8. In stark contrast, our method exhibits remarkable robustness by maintaining a consistently high SIM-O of over 0.65 across all evaluated NFE configurations. Furthermore, CoSync-DiT continuously secures a significantly lower Word Error Rate than AlignDiT at every corresponding step, achieving its optimal pronunciation clarity around an NFE of 16 to 32. These results compellingly demonstrate that our method establishes a robust dubbing system, unlocking highly efficient few-step inference without sacrificing acoustic or synchronization quality.

## Qualitative Comparison

We visualize the mel-spectrograms of the ground truth and the generated speech from different models in Fig. <a href="#fig:Visual" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Visual">4</a> (additional results are provided in the Appendix). The blue dashed regions and arrows highlight critical temporal intervals for audio-visual synchronization, while the white dashed boxes emphasize fine-grained pronunciation differences. While most baseline methods perform adequately on the controlled Chem dataset, they degrade sharply on more challenging benchmarks. Specifically in vlog and cinematic scenarios, models like InstructDubber and ProDubber completely fail to maintain proper audio-visual sync. Furthermore, AlignDiT exhibits noticeable temporal shifts and little distortions within the arrow-indicated regions. Conversely, our proposed CoSync-DiT synthesizes highly robust mel-spectrograms that most closely match the ground truth across both boundaries and details.

# Conclusion

In this paper, we propose CoSync-DiT, a flow matching-based framework for movie dubbing, which sequentially executes acoustic style adapting, fine-grained visual calibrating, and time-aware context aligning to explicitly guide the noise-to-speech generative trajectory. Furthermore, we introduce the Joint Semantic and Alignment Regularization (JSAR) mechanism to simultaneously enforce frame-level temporal consistency on the contextual outputs and semantic consistency on the flow hidden states, guaranteeing reliable pronunciation during the alignment phase. Extensive experiments on standard benchmarks and in-the-wild datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

# Appendix

This appendix provides the following extra content:

- Appendix <a href="#sec:AVSync" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:AVSync">6</a> provides additional quantitative results using the AVSync metric.

- Appendix <a href="#sec:zero-shot" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:zero-shot">7</a> presents experimental results under an extreme configuration combining Zero-shot and Setting 2.

- Appendix <a href="#sec:lrs3_aligndit" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:lrs3_aligndit">8</a> includes comparisons with the official checkpoint of AlignDiT trained on the large-scale LRS3 dataset.

- Appendix <a href="#sec:morevisual" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:morevisual">9</a> provides further qualitative visualizations and mel-spectrogram analysis.

We will open-source all detailed experimental settings, source code, and pre-trained weights.

# Synchronization Analysis (AVSync)

In this section, we expand upon our primary experimental results by introducing the AVSync metric to comprehensively evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method. Similar to Sync-KL , AVSync is a recently proposed metric specifically designed to assess fine-grained lip synchronization . As highlighted in recent work , AVSync provides a substantially more accurate evaluation of audio-visual alignment than traditional metrics such as LSE-C and LSE-D . Mechanistically, AVSync evaluates this synchronization by computing the cosine similarity between the AV-HuBERT  features extracted from the video paired with ground-truth speech and those extracted from the video paired with the synthesized speech.

<div id="result_CelebVDub_S1_AV">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ | AVSync(%)$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 100.00 | 4.15 | 100.00 | 0.000 | 3.38 | 100.00 |
| HPMDubbing  (CVPR’23) | 17.26 | 21.99 | 73.01 | 0.441 | 2.47 | 47.49 |
| StyleDubber (ACL’24) | 26.39 | 10.79 | 79.38 | 0.415 | 2.65 | 21.38 |
| EmoDubber  (CVPR’25) | 22.08 | 13.44 | 76.59 | 0.407 | 3.26 | 32.94 |
| FlowDubber  (MM’25) | 22.24 | 13.95 | 76.76 | 0.423 | 3.27 | 33.40 |
| Produbber  (CVPR’25) | 26.97 | 5.18 | 73.49 | 0.421 | 3.12 | 15.96 |
| HD-Dubber  (TPAMI’25) | 10.96 | 66.30 | 19.73 | 0.410 | 3.01 | 18.83 |
| AlignDiT  (MM’25) | 59.71 | 9.48 | 84.54 | 0.402 | 3.45 | 49.05 |
| InstructDub  (AAAI’26) | 29.12 | 6.13 | 75.57 | 0.429 | 3.16 | 16.74 |
| Ours | **65.21** | **4.29** | **84.61** | **0.392** | **3.46** | **65.94** |

Compared with SOTA Dubbing methods on the CelebV-Dub dataset under Setting 1. Unlike single dubbing scenario (*e.g*.., Chem), CelebV-Dub includes diverse video content (vlogs and dramas) with highly expressive speech.

</div>

<span id="result_CelebVDub_S1_AV" label="result_CelebVDub_S1_AV"></span>

<div id="result_CelebVDub_S2_AV">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ | AVSync(%)$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 66.13 | 4.15 | 100.00 | 0.000 | 3.38 | 100.00 |
| HPMDubbing  (CVPR’23) | 12.52 | 23.64 | 69.25 | 0.447 | 2.47 | 42.67 |
| StyleDubber   (ACL’24) | 19.42 | 7.03 | 74.87 | 0.405 | 2.63 | 20.75 |
| EmoDubber  (CVPR’25) | 18.78 | 16.37 | 76.30 | 0.422 | 3.30 | 32.14 |
| FlowDubber  (MM’25) | 19.32 | 14.94 | 74.18 | 0.420 | 3.31 | 32.37 |
| Produbber  (CVPR’25) | 23.13 | 6.41 | 71.38 | 0.432 | 3.14 | 14.92 |
| HD-Dubber (TPAMI’25) | 9.69 | 64.71 | 16.86 | 0.400 | 3.00 | 18.45 |
| AlignDiT   (MM’25) | 49.49 | 13.18 | 79.69 | 0.413 | **3.47** | 48.72 |
| InstructDub  (AAAI’26) | 22.85 | **5.64** | 74.03 | 0.434 | 3.18 | 16.16 |
| Ours | **53.44** | 6.39 | **80.29** | **0.381** | **3.47** | **52.12** |

Compared with SOTA methods on the CelebV-Dub dataset under Setting 2.

</div>

<span id="result_CelebVDub_S2_AV" label="result_CelebVDub_S2_AV"></span>

As reported in Tab. <a href="#result_CelebVDub_S1_AV" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_CelebVDub_S1_AV">6</a>, our method consistently achieves state-of-the-art results across all metrics after incorporating the AVSync evaluation. Specifically, our approach obtains an AVSync score of 65.94%, which outperforms the strongest baseline AlignDiT by an absolute margin of 16.89%. This confirms the effectiveness of our proposed cognitive synchronous diffusion mechanism. By progressively guiding the denoising process, our method introduces acoustic style adapting, fine-grained visual calibrating, and time-aware context aligning at different network stages. This structured integration effectively prevents feature entanglement during the early sampling steps and establishes a precise temporal alignment between the generated speech and the target lip movements. Furthermore, under the challenging Setting 2 scenario of CelebV-Dub (see Tab. <a href="#result_CelebVDub_S2_AV" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_CelebVDub_S2_AV">7</a>), although our method marginally trails the powerful TTS-pretrained baseline InstructDubber in Word Error Rate, it decisively surpasses all comparative methods in both speaker similarity and comprehensive synchronization metrics (both Sync-KL and AVSync). Consistent with these findings, our method sustains this comprehensive superiority in the out-of-domain movie evaluation (see Tab. <a href="#Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting1">8</a>), confirming its robust generalization capabilities and optimal alignment performance across unseen domains.

<div id="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting1">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ | AVSync(%)$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 100.00 | 2.56 | 100.00 | 0.00 | 3.15 | 100.00 |
| HPMDubbing (CVPR’23) | 42.72 | 99.20 | 61.22 | 0.391 | 3.23 | 17.00 |
| StyleDubber (ACL’24) | 41.65 | 74.96 | 63.88 | 0.362 | 2.89 | 22.56 |
| HD-Dubber \](TPAMI’25) | 5.84 | 42.75 | 56.32 | 0.337 | 2.58 | 19.33 |
| EmoDubber (CVPR’25) | 23.10 | 49.57 | 70.08 | 0.337 | 3.05 | 13.75 |
| FlowDubber (MM’25) | 22.68 | 54.41 | 67.39 | 0.354 | 3.04 | 13.58 |
| AlignDiT (MM’25) | 58.90 | 20.98 | 77.39 | 0.342 | 3.36 | 31.77 |
| ProDubber (CVPR’25) | 28.86 | 5.25 | 70.35 | 0.335 | 2.93 | 21.79 |
| InstructDub (AAAI’26) | 27.61 | **4.61** | 65.97 | 0.370 | 2.95 | 17.65 |
| Ours | **60.04** | 5.59 | **77.41** | **0.332** | **3.40** | **45.24** |

Zero-shot results on CinePile-Dub dataset (Out-of-Domain Movie). All models are trained on the training set of the basic dubbing dataset CelebV-Dub.

</div>

<span id="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting1" label="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting1"></span>

# Robustness Analysis in Challenging Scenarios (both Zero-Shot and Setting 2)

Although existing experimental configurations are sufficiently challenging, they primarily cover CelebV-Dub under Setting 1 and Setting 2 alongside a standard zero-shot evaluation on out-of-domain movies. In this section, we introduce a significantly more rigorous setting that integrates Setting 2 into the zero-shot evaluation. This setup simultaneously removes both the training domain priors and the interference of target speech, ultimately creating a highly demanding evaluation scenario. We systematically summarize all configurations in Tab. <a href="#tab_sm_Setting_CleanExplanation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab_sm_Setting_CleanExplanation">9</a>. We hope this robust evaluation design promotes the advancement of the reliable visual dubbing field and communities. We plan to open-source all detailed experimental settings, source code, and pre-trained weights.

<div id="tab_sm_Setting_CleanExplanation">

| Table | Reference audio Setting | Zero-shot Setting (OOD Movie) |
|:---|:--:|:--:|
| Tab. <a href="#result_CelebVDub_S1_AV" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_CelebVDub_S1_AV">6</a> | Setting 1 | $`\times`$ |
| Tab. <a href="#result_CelebVDub_S2_AV" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result_CelebVDub_S2_AV">7</a> | Setting 2 | $`\times`$ |
| Tab. <a href="#Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting1">8</a> | Setting 1 |  |
| Tab. <a href="#Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting2">10</a> | Setting 2 |  |
| Tab. <a href="#Appendix_S1CelebVDub" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Appendix_S1CelebVDub">11</a> | Setting 1 |  |
| Tab. <a href="#Official_result_CelebVDub_S2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Official_result_CelebVDub_S2">12</a> | Setting 2 |  |

Summary of the experiment configurations in the supplementary materials. Note that Setting 1 and Setting 2 define the reference audio selection strategy. Setting 1 uses the target speech as the reference audio, while Setting 2 uses an unaligned utterance from the same speaker. The Zero-shot condition indicates whether the target domain data is excluded during the training phase.

</div>

<span id="tab_sm_Setting_CleanExplanation" label="tab_sm_Setting_CleanExplanation"></span>

As reported in Tab. <a href="#Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting2">10</a>, the performance of all evaluated methods experiences a noticeable decline under this highly constrained configuration. Despite these extreme challenges, our proposed method consistently secures the best performance across all objective metrics. Specifically, our approach achieves the highest speaker similarity of 47.24% and emotional similarity of 70.12%. This demonstrates its superior capability to reliably extract and transfer target vocal characteristics from temporally unaligned reference segments. Furthermore, our model attains the lowest Word Error Rate of 7.53%, successfully surpassing the strong InstructDubber baseline. Regarding synchronization, our method records the most precise Sync-KL of 0.319 and an AVSync score of 31.79%, outperforming the strongest baseline AlignDiT by a solid absolute margin of 9.29%. These comprehensive results compellingly confirm the exceptional robustness of our CoSync-DiT. It proves that our progressive cognitive synchronous architecture can reliably maintain high-fidelity speech generation and strict audio-visual alignment even in the most demanding out-of-domain scenarios.

<div id="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting2">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ | AVSync(%)$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 60.58 | 2.56 | 100.00 | 0.00 | 3.15 | 100.00 |
| HPMDubbing (CVPR’23) | 30.75 | 93.86 | 52.93 | 0.382 | 3.24 | 13.87 |
| StyleDubber (ACL’24) | 28.67 | 77.61 | 57.15 | 0.372 | 2.88 | 16.48 |
| HD-Dubber \](TPAMI’25) | 7.04 | 64.12 | 47.66 | 0.330 | 2.58 | 18.86 |
| EmoDubber (CVPR’25) | 19.43 | 57.73 | 62.46 | 0.347 | 3.05 | 13.00 |
| FlowDubber (MM’25) | 19.86 | 55.93 | 63.86 | 0.346 | 3.05 | 13.05 |
| AlignDiT (MM’25) | 38.58 | 34.52 | 66.74 | 0.358 | 3.37 | 22.50 |
| ProDubber (CVPR’25) | 23.91 | 8.02 | 62.06 | 0.338 | 2.93 | 20.80 |
| InstructDub (AAAI’26) | 23.11 | 7.62 | 61.14 | 0.367 | 2.94 | 16.66 |
| Ours | **47.24** | **7.53** | **70.12** | **0.319** | **3.39** | **31.79** |

Zero-shot results on the CinePile-Dub dataset (Out-of-Domain Movie) under Setting 2. All models are trained on the training set of the basic dubbing dataset CelebV-Dub. The reference audio is from different segments of the same speaker.

</div>

<span id="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting2" label="Zero-shot-CinePile-Setting2"></span>

# Comparison with the Official AlignDiT Checkpoint

To the best of our knowledge, AlignDiT  represents one of the most advanced methods in the video-to-speech field. The official AlignDiT model is trained on the massive LRS3 dataset , which comprises approximately 131,000 utterances and 439 hours of unconstrained video content. In our primary experiments, we trained both our proposed method and the AlignDiT baseline on the CelebV-Dub dataset to ensure fairness. CelebV-Dub contains 67,549 samples totaling around 85.94 hours. Note that CelebV-Dub is currently the most popular and accessible large-scale dubbing dataset. Unfortunately, the complete LRS3 dataset is no longer available for public download from its official source. This restriction physically prevents us from training our model directly on the LRS3 dataset. Nevertheless, to conduct a comprehensive and fair comparison with the most powerful AlignDiT variant, we introduce an extended evaluation in this section. Specifically, we utilize the official pre-trained weights released by the AlignDiT authors to guarantee a rigorous and unbiased assessment. We denote this official LRS3-trained model as AlignDiT\*. To establish a strictly neutral testing ground, we evaluate all models on the out-of-domain CinePile-Dub cinematic dataset. This configuration ensures a completely fair zero-shot scenario for all competitors.

<div id="Appendix_S1CelebVDub">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ | AVSync(%)$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 100.00 | 4.15 | 100.00 | 0.000 | 3.38 | 100.00 |
| AlignDiT\*  | 61.51 | 18.35 | 76.33 | 0.338 | 3.25 | 24.03 |
| AlignDiT  | 58.90 | 20.98 | 77.39 | 0.342 | 3.36 | 31.77 |
| Ours | **60.04** | **5.59** | **77.41** | **0.332** | **3.40** | **45.24** |

Zero-shot evaluation results on the CinePile-Dub dataset (Out-of-domain Movie) under Setting 1. The asterisk (\*) denotes the official AlignDiT checkpoint pre-trained on the large-scale LRS3 dataset. All evaluated models face completely unseen target domains.

</div>

<span id="Appendix_S1CelebVDub" label="Appendix_S1CelebVDub"></span>

<div id="Official_result_CelebVDub_S2">

| Methods | SPKSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | WER(%)$`\downarrow`$ | EMOSIM(%)$`\uparrow`$ | Sync-KL$`\downarrow`$ | DNSMOS$`\uparrow`$ | AVSync(%)$`\uparrow`$ |
|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| GT | 100.00 | 4.15 | 100.00 | 0.000 | 3.38 | 100.00 |
| AlignDiT\*  | 44.01 | 35.90 | 68.80 | 0.359 | 3.23 | 18.72 |
| AlignDiT  | 38.58 | 34.52 | 66.74 | 0.358 | 3.37 | 22.50 |
| Ours | **47.24** | **7.53** | **70.12** | **0.319** | **3.39** | **31.79** |

Zero-shot evaluation results on the CinePile-Dub dataset (Out-of-domain Movie) under Setting 2. All evaluated models face completely unseen target domains and non-target reference audio. The asterisk (\*) denotes the official AlignDiT checkpoint pre-trained on the large-scale LRS3 dataset.

</div>

<span id="Official_result_CelebVDub_S2" label="Official_result_CelebVDub_S2"></span>

<figure id="fig:Visual1" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="Figs/Visual_SM1.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption> Visual comparison of the generated mel-spectrograms with ground truth. The blue and white bounding boxes highlight regions where different models exhibit significant differences in duration and spectrogram details. Furthermore, the blue arrows pinpoint specific temporal regions that require critical attention for evaluating audio-visual synchronization. </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:Visual2" data-latex-placement="tb">
<embed src="Figs/Visual_SM2.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption> Visual comparison of the generated mel-spectrograms with ground truth under zero-shot setting (out-of-domain movie scenario). The blue and white bounding boxes highlight regions where different models exhibit significant differences in duration and spectrogram details. Furthermore, the blue arrows pinpoint specific temporal regions that require critical attention for evaluating audio-visual synchronization. </figcaption>
</figure>

The comprehensive zero-shot quantitative results are reported in Tab. <a href="#Appendix_S1CelebVDub" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Appendix_S1CelebVDub">11</a> (Zero-shot & Setting1) and Tab. <a href="#Official_result_CelebVDub_S2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="Official_result_CelebVDub_S2">12</a> (Zero-shot & Setting2). First, we observe that the AlignDiT model trained on CelebV-Dub achieves performance highly comparable to the official AlignDiT\* model trained on LRS3. This directly confirms that our baseline implementation on CelebV-Dub is solid and does not disadvantage the comparative architecture. More importantly, our proposed method consistently outperforms both AlignDiT variants across all objective metrics. Even though our model is trained on a dataset approximately one-fifth the size of LRS3, it significantly suppresses the Word Error Rate and achieves much higher AVSync scores in both settings. This compellingly demonstrates that our architectural design possesses superior cross-modal alignment capabilities and stronger zero-shot generalization than merely scaling up the training data volume.

# More Qualitative Comparison

In this section, we provide additional visual examples of the generated mel-spectrograms to further evaluate the generated quality. As illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:Visual1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Visual1">5</a> and Fig. <a href="#fig:Visual2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Visual2">6</a>, our proposed method demonstrates a distinct advantage in preserving both fine-grained acoustic details and audio-visual alignment. We specifically highlight the critical temporal regions indicated by the blue arrows. For instance, in the middle column of Fig. <a href="#fig:Visual1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Visual1">5</a>, this baseline exhibits a slight temporal shift. Similarly, in the middle column of Fig. <a href="#fig:Visual2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Visual2">6</a>, the state-of-the-art AlignDiT baseline completely misses the specific acoustic regions that should be synchronized with the ground truth. Conversely, our method, shown in the second row, reconstructs these specific acoustic patterns with strict temporal alignment. Furthermore, by observing the white rectangular boxes, our method presents highly clear spectrogram details. This directly reflects the robust timbre preservation and pronunciation clarity of our generated speech. This visual evidence intuitively validates the effectiveness of our method in guaranteeing precise audio-visual synchronization. Additionally, comparing our approach with duration predictor-based methods like InstructDubber and ProDubber reveals a fundamental architectural limitation of those baselines. Although such methods yield high pronunciation clarity, they completely fail to preserve audio-visual alignment in practical dubbing scenarios. As indicated by the blue rectangular boxes, their temporal synchronization is highly inaccurate.

## References

1. FastSpeech 2: Fast and High-Quality End-to-End Text to Speech
2. Llasm: Large language and speech model [arXiv:2308.15930](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.15930)
3. Large-scale Multi-modal Pre-trained Models: A Comprehensive Survey
4. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models
5. Decoupled weight decay regularization [arXiv:1711.05101](https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101)
6. R\&b: Region and boundary aware zero-shot grounded text-to-image generation [arXiv:2310.08872](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.08872)
7. FastSpeech: Fast, Robust and Controllable Text to Speech
8. Phase-Aware Speech Enhancement with Deep Complex U-Net
9. Lip-to-Speech Synthesis for Arbitrary Speakers in the Wild [arXiv:2209.00642](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00642)
10. FastLTS: Non-Autoregressive End-to-End Unconstrained Lip-to-Speech Synthesis
11. More than Words: In-the-Wild Visually-Driven Prosody for Text-to-Speech
12. Visualtts: TTS with Accurate Lip-Speech Synchronization for Automatic Voice Over
13. High-Quality Automatic Voice Over with Accurate Alignment: Supervision through Self-Supervised Discrete Speech Units [arXiv:2306.17005](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.17005)
14. StyleDubber: Towards Multi-Scale Style Learning for Movie Dubbing [arXiv:2402.12636](../2024/2402.12636.md)
15. The Basic Of English Phonology: A Literature Review
16. Natural TTS Synthesis by Conditioning Wavenet on MEL Spectrogram Predictions
17. Attention is All you Need
18. Meta-StyleSpeech : Multi-Speaker Adaptive Text-to-Speech Generation
19. Neural Voice Cloning with a Few Samples
20. Glow-TTS: A Generative Flow for Text-to-Speech via Monotonic Alignment
                  Search
21. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and next generation agentic capabilities [arXiv:2507.06261](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.06261)
22. SC-GlowTTS: An Efficient Zero-Shot Multi-Speaker Text-To-Speech Model
23. YourTTS: Towards Zero-Shot Multi-Speaker TTS and Zero-Shot Voice
                  Conversion for Everyone
24. BigVGAN: A Universal Neural Vocoder with Large-Scale Training [arXiv:2206.04658](https://arxiv.org/abs/2206.04658)
25. ISTFTNET: Fast and Lightweight Mel-Spectrogram Vocoder Incorporating
                  Inverse Short-Time Fourier Transform
26. HiFi-GAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for Efficient and High Fidelity Speech Synthesis
27. High Fidelity Speech Synthesis with Adversarial Networks
28. GANSpeech: Adversarial Training for High-Fidelity Multi-Speaker Speech
                  Synthesis
29. Montreal Forced Aligner: Trainable Text-Speech Alignment Using Kaldi.
30. Lipreading Using Temporal Convolutional Networks
31. Towards Practical Lipreading with Distilled and Efficient Models
32. From WER and RIL to MER and WIL: improved evaluation measures
                  for connected speech recognition [doi:10.21437/Interspeech.2004-668](https://doi.org/10.21437/Interspeech.2004-668)
33. DiffSinger: Singing Voice Synthesis via Shallow Diffusion Mechanism
34. Speedyspeech: Efficient neural speech synthesis [arXiv:2008.03802](https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.03802)
35. Estimation of continuous valence and arousal levels from faces in naturalistic conditions [doi:10.1038/s42256-020-00280-0](https://doi.org/10.1038/s42256-020-00280-0)
36. Prosospeech: Enhancing Prosody with Quantized Vector Pre-Training
                  in Text-To-Speech
37. WhisperX: Time-Accurate Speech Transcription of Long-Form Audio
38. Multimodal Transformer for Unaligned Multimodal Language Sequences
39. StyleTTS 2: Towards Human-Level Text-to-Speech through Style Diffusion
                  and Adversarial Training with Large Speech Language Models
40. Diff-TTS: A Denoising Diffusion Model for Text-to-Speech
41. RobuTrans: A Robust Transformer-Based Text-to-Speech Model
42. Tackling the Generative Learning Trilemma with Denoising Diffusion
                  GANs
43. Grad-TTS: A Diffusion Probabilistic Model for Text-to-Speech
44. NaturalSpeech 3: Zero-shot speech synthesis with factorized codec and diffusion models [arXiv:2403.03100](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03100)
45. Voicebox: Text-guided multilingual universal speech generation at scale [arXiv:2306.15687](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15687)
46. Enhancing Monotonicity for Robust Autoregressive Transformer TTS
47. MultiSpeech: Multi-Speaker Text to Speech with Transformer
48. StyleTalk++: A Unified Framework for Controlling the Speaking Styles of Talking Heads
49. Diffusion Models in Vision: A Survey
50. Deep Audio-Visual Speech Recognition
51. Online Knowledge Distillation via Mutual Contrastive Learning for
                  Visual Recognition
52. Contrastive Learning With Stronger Augmentations
53. A Low Rank Promoting Prior for Unsupervised Contrastive Learning
54. DaGAN++: Depth-Aware Generative Adversarial Network for Talking Head
                  Video Generation
55. NaturalSpeech: End-to-End Text-to-Speech Synthesis With Human-Level
                  Quality
56. NaturalSpeech 2: Latent Diffusion Models are Natural and Zero-Shot
                  Speech and Singing Synthesizers
57. Voicebox: Text-Guided Multilingual Universal Speech Generation at
                  Scale
58. Neural codec language models are zero-shot text to speech synthesizers [arXiv:2301.02111](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.02111)
59. The art of voice acting: The craft and business of performing for voiceover
60. DubWise: Video-Guided Speech Duration Control in Multimodal LLM-based
                  Text-to-Speech for Dubbing
61. Megatts 3: Sparse alignment enhanced latent diffusion transformer for zero-shot speech synthesis [arXiv:2502.18924](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.18924)
62. FastDiff 2: Revisiting and Incorporating GANs and Diffusion Models
                  in High-Fidelity Speech Synthesis
63. Prosody-TTS: Improving Prosody with Masked Autoencoder and Conditional
                  Diffusion Model For Expressive Text-to-Speech
64. Text-to-Speech for Low-Resource Agglutinative Language With Morphology-Aware Language Model Pre-Training
65. Thinking the voice: neural correlates of voice perception
66. Hearing lips and seeing voices
67. Learning Individual Speaking Styles for Accurate Lip to Speech Synthesis
68. Cross-modal Self-Supervised Learning for Lip Reading: When Contrastive
                  Learning meets Adversarial Training [doi:10.1145/3474085.3475415](https://doi.org/10.1145/3474085.3475415)
69. Audio-Visual Contrastive Pre-train for Face Forgery Detection
70. Joint Audio-Visual Attention with Contrastive Learning for More General
                  Deepfake Detection
71. FastLTS: Non-Autoregressive End-to-End Unconstrained Lip-to-Speech
                  Synthesis
72. Lip-to-Speech Synthesis in the Wild with Multi-Task Learning
73. Lip-to-Speech Synthesis for Arbitrary Speakers in the Wild [arXiv:2209.00642](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.00642)
74. Connectionist temporal classification: labelling unsegmented sequence
                  data with recurrent neural networks
75. Let There Be Sound: Reconstructing High Quality Speech from Silent
                  Videos
76. SadTalker: Learning Realistic 3D Motion Coefficients for Stylized
                  Audio-Driven Single Image Talking Face Animation
77. DiffDub: Person-Generic Visual Dubbing Using Inpainting Renderer with Diffusion Auto-Encoder
78. Neural Emotion Director: Speech-preserving semantic control of facial expressions in "in-the-wild" videos
79. VASA-1: Lifelike Audio-Driven Talking Faces Generated in Real Time [arXiv:2404.10667](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10667)
80. V2C: Visual Voice Cloning
81. Dian: Duration Informed Auto-Regressive Network for Voice Cloning
82. Learning to Dub Movies via Hierarchical Prosody Models
83. Neural Dubber: Dubbing for Videos According to Scripts
84. An audio-visual corpus for speech perception and automatic speech recognition
85. Matcha-TTS: A fast TTS architecture with conditional flow matching [arXiv:2309.03199](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.03199)
86. Stablevc: Style controllable zero-shot voice conversion with conditional flow matching [arXiv:2412.04724](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.04724)
87. Cosyvoice: A scalable multilingual zero-shot text-to-speech synthesizer based on supervised semantic tokens [arXiv:2407.05407](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.05407)
88. Cosyvoice 2: Scalable streaming speech synthesis with large language models [arXiv:2412.10117](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.10117)
89. F5-tts: A fairytaler that fakes fluent and faithful speech with flow matching [arXiv:2410.06885](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.06885)
90. Tacotron: Towards End-to-End Speech Synthesis
91. Content-Dependent Fine-Grained Speaker Embedding for Zero-Shot Speaker
                  Adaptation in Text-to-Speech Synthesis
92. Qwen3 technical report [arXiv:2505.09388](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.09388)
93. Imaginary Voice: Face-Styled Diffusion Model for Text-to-Speech
94. Dynamic time warping
95. Robust Speech Recognition via Large-Scale Weak Supervision
96. AlignDiT: Multimodal Aligned Diffusion Transformer for Synchronized Speech Generation
97. EmoDubber: Towards High Quality and Emotion Controllable Movie Dubbing [arXiv:2412.08988](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.08988)
98. Temporal Modeling Matters: A Novel Temporal Emotional Modeling Approach
                  for Speech Emotion Recognition
99. Diffgan-tts: High-fidelity and efficient text-to-speech with denoising diffusion gans [arXiv:2201.11972](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11972)
100. WaveNet: A Generative Model for Raw Audio
101. Tackling the Generative Learning Trilemma with Denoising Diffusion
                  GANs
102. Parallel Wavegan: A Fast Waveform Generation Model Based on Generative
                  Adversarial Networks with Multi-Resolution Spectrogram
103. Avocodo: Generative Adversarial Network for Artifact-Free Vocoder
104. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity [doi:10.1109/TIP.2003.819861](https://doi.org/10.1109/TIP.2003.819861)
105. ProDiff: Progressive Fast Diffusion Model for High-Quality Text-to-Speech
106. Improved Techniques for Training GANs
107. Autoencoding beyond pixels using a learned similarity metric
108. MelGAN: Generative Adversarial Networks for Conditional Waveform Synthesis
109. Revisiting over-smoothness in text to speech [arXiv:2202.13066](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.13066)
110. VocGAN: A High-Fidelity Real-Time Vocoder with a Hierarchically-Nested
                  Adversarial Network
111. Least Squares Generative Adversarial Networks
112. Generative Adversarial Nets
113. A Style-Based Generator Architecture for Generative Adversarial Networks
114. Hypergraph Neural Networks
115. Hypergraph Theory
116. Network Motifs: Simple Building Blocks of Complex Networks
117. Language Modeling with Gated Convolutional Networks
118. LightGCN: Simplifying and Powering Graph Convolution Network for Recommendation
119. Ranking Users in Social Networks with Higher-Order Structures
120. Semi-Supervised Classification with Graph Convolutional Networks
121. BPR: Bayesian Personalized Ranking from Implicit Feedback
122. Neural Graph Collaborative Filtering
123. Hypergraph Convolution and Hypergraph Attention
124. Dual Channel Hypergraph Collaborative Filtering
125. Self-Supervised Multi-Channel Hypergraph Convolutional Network for Social Recommendation
126. Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social Networks
127. Private Traits and Attributes are Predictable from Digital Records of Human Behavior
128. Joint Item Recommendation and Attribute Inference: An Adaptive Graph Convolutional Network Approach
129. Attribute-Aware Non-Linear Co-Embeddings of Graph Features
130. Adam: A Method for Stochastic Optimization
131. Inductive Representation Learning on Large Graphs
132. A Neural Influence Diffusion Model for Social Recommendation
133. Dynamic Hypergraph Neural Networks
134. Graph Convolutional Matrix Completion
135. Graph Attention Networks
136. Gated Graph Sequence Neural Networks
137. Graph Convolutional Neural Networks for Web-Scale Recommender Systems
138. Inductive Matrix Completion Based on Graph Neural Networks
139. STAR-GCN: Stacked and Reconstructed Graph Convolutional Networks for Recommender Systems
140. Toward the Next Generation of Recommender Systems: A Survey of the State-of-the-Art and Possible Extensions
141. Research Commentary on Recommendations with Side Information: A Survey and Research Directions
142. A Survey of Collaborative Filtering Techniques
143. Comparison of Collaborative Filtering Algorithms: Limitations of Current Techniques and Proposals for Scalable, High-Performance Recommender Systems
144. Collaborative Filtering Beyond the User-Item Matrix: A Survey of the State of the Art and Future Challenges
145. Parallel and Distributed Collaborative Filtering: A Survey
146. Modeling the Evolution of Users’ Preferences and Social Links in Social Networking Services
147. Conceptual Recommender System for CiteSeerX
148. Towards Text-Based Recommendations
149. Dual Learning for Explainable Recommendation: Towards Unifying User Preference Prediction and Review Generation
150. SVDFeature: A Toolkit for Feature-Based Collaborative Filtering
151. Factorization Machines with Libfm
152. The Movielens Datasets: History and Context
153. Matrix Factorization Techniques for Recommender Systems [doi:10.1109/MC.2009.263](https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2009.263)
154. Representation Learning with Contrastive Predictive Coding [arXiv:1807.03748](https://arxiv.org/abs/1807.03748)
155. Joint Link Prediction and Attribute Inference Using a Social-Attribute Network
156. Bi-directional Joint Inference for User Links and Attributes on Large Social Graphs
157. Mixed pooling for convolutional neural networks
158. Self-Supervised Learning of Graph Neural Networks: A Unified Review [arXiv:2102.10757](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.10757)
159. Self-supervised Learning: Generative or Contrastive
160. InfoGraph: Unsupervised and Semi-supervised Graph-Level Representation Learning via Mutual Information Maximization
161. Mutual Information Neural Estimation.
162. Graph Representation Learning via Graphical Mutual Information Maximization
163. GCC: Graph Contrastive Coding for Graph Neural Network Pre-Training
164. Graph Contrastive Learning with Augmentations
165. Graph Contrastive Learning with Adaptive Augmentation
166. Hypergraph Contrastive Collaborative Filtering
167. Multi-Stage Self-Supervised Learning for Graph Convolutional Networks on Graphs with Few Labeled Nodes
168. When Does Self-Supervision Help Graph Convolutional Networks?
169. Self-supervised Graph Learning for Recommendation
170. S3fd: Single shot scale-invariant face detector
171. Generalized End-to-End Loss for Speaker Verification
172. Deep speaker: an end-to-end neural speaker embedding system [arXiv:1705.02304](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02304)
173. Quo vadis, action recognition? a new model and the kinetics dataset
174. WavLM: Large-Scale Self-Supervised Pre-Training for Full Stack Speech
                  Processing
175. WavLLM: Towards Robust and Adaptive Speech Large Language Model [arXiv:2404.00656](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.00656)
176. Cross-Modal Relation-Aware Networks for Audio-Visual Event Localization
177. FiLM: Visual Reasoning with a General Conditioning Layer
178. Video-LLaMA: An Instruction-tuned Audio-Visual Language Model for
                  Video Understanding
179. Generating Visually Aligned Sound From Videos
180. Learning Hierarchical Modular Networks for Video Captioning
181. MaskGCT: Zero-Shot Text-to-Speech with Masked Generative Codec Transformer
182. End-To-End Audio-Visual Speech Recognition with Conformers
183. Deep Visual Forced Alignment: Learning to Align Transcription with
                  Talking Face Video
184. V2SFlow: Video-to-Speech Generation with Speech Decomposition and Rectified Flow
185. Av2av: Direct audio-visual speech to audio-visual speech translation with unified audio-visual speech representation
186. Temporal Modeling Matters: A Novel Temporal Emotional Modeling Approach
                  for Speech Emotion Recognition
187. Emotional face-to-speech [arXiv:2502.01046](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.01046)
188. Intelligible Lip-to-Speech Synthesis with Speech Units
189. From Faces to Voices: Learning Hierarchical Representations for High-quality Video-to-Speech [arXiv:2503.16956](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.16956)
190. VoiceCraft-Dub: Automated Video Dubbing with Neural Codec Language Models [arXiv:2504.02386](../2025/2504.02386.md)
191. Shushing! Let's Imagine an Authentic Speech from the Silent Video [arXiv:2503.14928](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.14928)
192. DeepAudio-V1: Towards Multi-Modal Multi-Stage End-to-End Video to Speech and Audio Generation [arXiv:2503.22265](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.22265)
193. FCConDubber: Fine And Coarse Grained Prosody Alignment For Expressive Video Dubbing via Contrastive Audio-Motion Pretraining
194. Prosody-Enhanced Acoustic Pre-training and Acoustic-Disentangled Prosody Adapting for Movie Dubbing [arXiv:2503.12042](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.12042)
195. From Speaker to Dubber: Movie Dubbing with Prosody and Duration Consistency Learning
196. LibriTTS: A Corpus Derived from LibriSpeech for Text-to-Speech
197. MCDubber: Multimodal Context-Aware Expressive Video Dubbing [arXiv:2408.11593](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11593)
198. Flow matching for generative modeling [arXiv:2210.02747](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02747)
199. Neural ordinary differential equations
200. Maximum likelihood training of score-based diffusion models
201. VoiceFlow: Efficient Text-To-Speech with Rectified Flow Matching
202. P-Flow: A Fast and Data-Efficient Zero-Shot TTS through Speech
                  Prompting
203. Voicebox: Text-Guided Multilingual Universal Speech Generation at
                  Scale
204. Advancing Zero-shot Text-to-Speech Intelligibility across Diverse Domains via Preference Alignment
205. InstructDubber: Instruction-based Alignment for Zero-shot Movie Dubbing [arXiv:2512.17154](../2025/2512.17154.md)
206. LRS3-TED: a large-scale dataset for visual speech recognition
207. Lip reading sentences in the wild
208. CelebV-HQ: A Large-Scale Video Facial Attributes Dataset
209. CelebV-Text: A Large-Scale Facial Text-Video Dataset
210. Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units
211. Learning Audio-Visual Speech Representation by Masked Multimodal Cluster
                  Prediction
212. Audio-visual speech representation expert for enhanced talking face video generation and evaluation
213. Out of Time: Automated Lip Sync in the Wild
214. CinePile: A Long Video Question Answering Dataset and Benchmark
215. Dubbing Movies via Hierarchical Phoneme Modeling and Acoustic Diffusion Denoising
216. IndexTTS2: A Breakthrough in Emotionally Expressive and Duration-Controlled Auto-Regressive Zero-Shot Text-to-Speech [arXiv:2506.21619](https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.21619)
217. Is Someone Speaking? Exploring Long-term Temporal Features for Audio-visual Active Speaker Detection
218. Convnext v2: Co-designing and scaling convnets with masked autoencoders
219. Classifier-free diffusion guidance [arXiv:2207.12598](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.12598)
220. W2v-bert: Combining contrastive learning and masked language modeling for self-supervised speech pre-training
221. Improving and generalizing flow-based generative models with minibatch
                  optimal transport
222. VSSFlow: Unifying Video-conditioned Sound and Speech Generation via Joint Learning [arXiv:2509.24773](https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.24773)
223. Towards Authentic Movie Dubbing with Retrieve-Augmented Director-Actor Interaction Learning [arXiv:2511.14249](../2025/2511.14249.md)
224. FlowDubber: Movie Dubbing with LLM-based Semantic-aware Learning and Flow Matching based Voice Enhancing
225. Recent Advances in Discrete Speech Tokens: A Review
226. emotion2vec: Self-Supervised Pre-Training for Speech Emotion Representation
227. High fidelity neural audio compression [arXiv:2210.13438](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.13438)
228. Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec
229. Utmos: Utokyo-sarulab system for voicemos challenge 2022 [arXiv:2204.02152](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.02152)
230. DNSMOS: A non-intrusive perceptual objective speech quality metric to evaluate noise suppressors
231. Spark-tts: An efficient llm-based text-to-speech model with single-stream decoupled speech tokens [arXiv:2503.01710](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.01710)
232. Speechgpt: Empowering large language models with intrinsic cross-modal conversational abilities [arXiv:2305.11000](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.11000)
233. A survey on speech large language models for understanding
234. Recent advances in speech language models: A survey
235. Towards universal speech discrete tokens: A case study for asr and tts
236. Speechtokenizer: Unified speech tokenizer for speech large language models [arXiv:2308.16692](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.16692)
237. wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of Speech
                  Representations
238. Emotional Face-to-Speech
239. Hierarchical Codec Diffusion for Video-to-Speech Generation
240. DepMamba: Progressive Fusion Mamba for Multimodal Depression Detection
241. FunCineForge: A Unified Dataset Toolkit and Model for Zero-Shot Movie Dubbing in Diverse Cinematic Scenes [arXiv:2601.14777](./2601.14777.md)
242. DiFlowDubber: Discrete Flow Matching for Automated Video Dubbing via Cross-Modal Alignment and Synchronization [arXiv:2603.14267](./2603.14267.md)
243. DeepDubber-V1: Towards High Quality and Dialogue, Narration, Monologue Adaptive Movie Dubbing Via Multi-Modal Chain-of-Thoughts Reasoning Guidance [arXiv:2503.23660](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.23660)
244. Dualdub: Video-to-soundtrack generation via joint speech and background audio synthesis
