---
arxiv_id: '2301.06281'
title: 'DPE: Disentanglement of Pose and Expression for General Video Portrait Editing'
authors:
- Youxin Pang
- Yong Zhang
- Weize Quan
- Yanbo Fan
- Xiaodong Cun
- Ying Shan
- Dong-ming Yan
submitted: '2023-01-16'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.06281
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 7/42
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:24:34+00:00'
references_parsed: 42
arxiv_version: ''
---

# The Proposed Method

<figure id="fig:network" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/network2.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Illustration of our proposed model. The framework consists of three learnable components, <em>i.e.,</em> the motion editing module, the expression generator, and the pose generator. The editing module projects the source and driving images into a latent space where pose motion and expression motion can be disentangled, and then modifies the latent code of the source image according to a given indicator that points out either expression or pose to edit. It outputs an edited latent code and the feature maps of the source image. The pose and expression generators are applied to render the outputs of the editing module to a face image. These two generators share the same architecture but different parameters for interpreting the pose and expression code respectively. </figcaption>
</figure>

To apply one-shot talking face generation for general video editing, the disentanglement of pose and expression is indispensable to handle the paste-back operation, *i.e.,* pasting the edited cropped face to the full image. In this work, we propose a self-supervised disentanglement framework without paired data and the predefined 3DMMs. The whole pipeline is illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:network" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:network">1</a>. Our model contains three learnable components, *i.e.,* *the motion editing module*, *the expression generator*, and *the pose generator*. To accomplish the disentanglement, we propose a bidirectional cyclic training strategy to compensate for the missing paired data in which pose or expression are edited individually. We first introduce the three components in Sec. <a href="#subsec: arc" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: arc">[subsec: arc]</a>. We then present the training strategy in Sec. <a href="#subsec: training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: training">[subsec: training]</a>, followed by the learning objective functions in Sec. <a href="#subsec: losses" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="subsec: losses">[subsec: losses]</a>.

## Architecture

 <span id="subsec: arc" label="subsec: arc"></span>

**Motion Editing Module.** As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:network" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:network">1</a>, given a source image, a driving one, and an editing indicator, the motion editing module yields out an edited latent code and the multi-scale feature maps of the source image. The indicator tells either pose or expression of the source image to be edited. Inside the module, an encoder is used to project an input image to a latent space that is supposed to be decomposable into two orthogonal subspaces. Let $`S`$, $`D`$, and $`O`$ denote the source image, the driving one, and the indicator, respectively. Let $`E`$ denote the encoder. Then, we have:
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{c} &= E(X),
\end{align}
```
where $`X`$ is the input of the encoder and $`\mathbf{c}`$ represents the output latent code. $`\mathbf{c}_s = E(S)`$ and $`\mathbf{c}_d = E(D)`$ are the latent codes of $`S`$ and $`D`$.

As the driving image provides the facial motion reference, a motion encoder is required to project an image to the same latent space of the encoder. Instead of using an separate encoder, we construct the motion space based on the latent space of the encoder. Specifically, we use several multiple perceptron (MLP) layers to disentangle the latent space of the encoder to two orthogonal subspaces, *i.e.,* the pose motion space and the expression motion space. The architecture of the disentanglement module is that the first few MLP layers act as the shared backbone, followed by two heads that are also composed of MLP layers. The disentanglement process can be formulated as:
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{e}, \mathbf{p} &= \text{MLP}(\mathbf{c}),
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathbf{e}`$ and $`\mathbf{p}`$ represent the expression and pose motion code, respectively. They share the same dimension as $`\mathbf{c}`$.

For motion editing, we apply an indicator to specify either pose or expression to edit, which is a binary variable. When $`O=\text{pose}`$, only the pose motion is transferred to the source image. When $`O= \text{exp}`$, the expression is transferred. One benefit of disentangling motion in the latent space of the encoder is that motion transfer can be performed by a simple addition, *e.g.,*, the expression editing can be defined as:
``` math
\begin{align}
    \overline{\mathbf{c}}_e &= \mathbf{c} + \mathbf{e},
\end{align}
```
where $`\overline{\mathbf{c}}_e`$ represents the edited code with expression transfer. Similar, we have the pose editing, *i.e.,* $`\overline{\mathbf{c}}_p = \mathbf{c} + \mathbf{p}`$.

Let $`M`$ denote the motion editing module. The whole process can be defined as:
``` math
\begin{align}
    \overline{\mathbf{c}}, \mathcal{F}  &= M(S, D, O),
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathcal{F} = \{\mathbf{F}_k\}^K`$ represents the feature maps of the source image, extracted from the encoder. $`K`$ is the number of blocks in the encoder. Both the latent code and the feature maps are from the encoder. The former represents high-level information while the latter represents mid-level information.

**Pose and Expression Generators.** The pose or expression of the source image is edited in the latent space by adding the pose or expression motion from the driving one. Since pose motion captures the global head movement while expression motion captures the local movements of facial components, we use two individual generators for better interpretation of the edited latent code, *i.e.,* the expression generator $`G_{e}`$ and the pose generator $`G_{p}`$ . The two generators share the same architecture but different parameters.

Inspired by the flow-based methods , we use flow fields to manipulate the feature maps. Fig. <a href="#fig:network" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:network">1</a> gives an illustration of the generators. Similar to the pipeline of StyleGAN2, we exploit the latent code to generate multi-scale flow fields that are used to warp the feature maps from the encoder in the motion editing module. The warped feature maps are aggregated to render an image. The expression generator can be defined as:
``` math
\begin{align}
    Y_e &= G_e(\mathbf{c}, \mathcal{F}),
\end{align}
```
where $`Y_e`$ is the output image of the expression generator. Similar, the pose generator is $`Y_p = G_p(\mathbf{c}, \mathcal{F})`$.

## Bidirectional Cyclic Training Strategy

 <span id="subsec: training" label="subsec: training"></span>

<figure id="fig:training" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/training.pdf" />
<figcaption>An illustration of the training strategy.</figcaption>
</figure>

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:training">2</a>, the pipeline is designed for editing expression and pose independently and sequentially. By extracting two frames from a video as input, we can provide supervision at the end of the pipeline. However, only such supervision is not enough to disentangle pose and expression. Without supervision for the intermediate result (*i.e.,* the output of the expression generator), all the subnetworks will be treated as one network as a whole to complete the reconstruction task with no effort to distinguish the responsibilities of the two generators.

<figure id="fig:params" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure/fig_params.pdf" />
<figcaption>An illustration of the parameter space.</figcaption>
</figure>

We give a simple illustration in Fig. <a href="#fig:params" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:params">3</a>(a). The task is to scale a large square to a small one in two steps within the range of the gray square. Without any constraint, the intermediate result of the first step can be any rectangle in the range (see the top of Fig. <a href="#fig:params" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:params">3</a>(a)). Given the constraint that the height should be the same as the width, the solution space can be greatly narrowed and the intermediate result becomes to be with the property (see the bottom of Fig. <a href="#fig:params" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:params">3</a>(a)). Therefore, in our case, given no paired data, we should design a certain constraint to guarantee the disentanglement property of the framework. Otherwise, the intermediate face of the expression generator can be in any shape as long as the pose generator can interpret it. We further give an illustration from the perspective of the parameter space in Fig. <a href="#fig:params" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:params">3</a>(b). Let $`\theta_m`$, $`\theta_e`$, and $`\theta_p`$ denote the parameters of the motion editing module, the expression generator, and the pose generator, respectively. For the simplicity of explanation, we assume the motion editing module is optimal, *i.e.,* $`\theta_m^*`$. Without paired data, the solution can be any combination of $`\theta_e`$ and $`\theta_p`$ if they are able to reconstruct the driving image during training. If effective constraints are discovered, the solution space can be narrowed and the meaningful solution can be obtained to own the property emphasized by the constraints.

To ensure the disentanglement, we propose a bidirectional cyclic training strategy without paired data, which is illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:training">2</a>. Let $`e(S, D)`$ denote expression transfer from $`D`$ to $`S`$, *i.e.,*
``` math
\begin{align}
    S' = e(S,D) = G_e(M(S,D,O=\text{exp})),
\end{align}
```
where $`S'`$ is the expression transfer result. Let $`p(S', D)`$ denote pose transfer from $`D`$ to $`S'`$, *i.e.,*
``` math
\begin{align}
    S'' = p(S',D) = G_p(M(S',D,O=\text{pose})),
\end{align}
```
where $`S''`$ is the pose transfer result. Similarly, we exchange roles of the source and driving images to transfer the pose and expression of the source image to the driving one sequentially. Then, we have $`D' = p(D, S)`$ with pose transferred from $`S`$, and $`D'' = e(D', S)`$ with expression from $`S`$.

Given tuples $`<S, S', S''>`$ and $`<D, D', D''>`$, we can design a set of constraints for the disentanglement. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:training" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:training">2</a>, the three dash lines indicate that three pairs of images can be used to compute reconstruction losses, *i.e.,* $`<S'', D>`$, $`<D'', S>`$, and $`<S', D'>`$. Please note that though the pair $`<S', D'>`$ can constrain the intermediate result and narrows the solution space, but it still cannot ensure the disentanglement of pose and expression and the intermediate result is even not face.

Fortunately, we discover that the self-reconstruction of the two generators is core for the disentanglement, *i.e.,* the pair $`<S, e(S, S)>`$ and $`<S, p(S,S)>`$. Such pairs encourage the generators to output meaningful face and encourage the editing module to extract the accurate pose and expression motion. Otherwise, the generators’ outputs will never be the same as the input and there will be always a distance between the two images of a pair. Theoretically, there is an extreme case where all constraints can be satisfied but the disentanglement fails, *i.e.,* one generator is an identity mapping network while the other generator takes the responsibility of both expression and pose transfer. However, we have never met this case in practise. One reason is that the generators are randomly initialized and the probability of their convergence to an identity mapping is very low.

## Loss Functions

 <span id="subsec: losses" label="subsec: losses"></span> **Reconstruction loss $`\mathcal{L}_{C}`$.** The *Mean Absolute Error (MAE)* is used to compute the errors between two images in the three pairs:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{rec} = \mathcal{L}_{C}(S'',D) + \mathcal{L}_{C}(D'',S) + \mathcal{L}_{C}(S', D').
\end{equation}
```

**Perceptual loss $`\mathcal{L}_{P}`$.** To make the synthetic results look more realistic, we also apply the perceptual loss to the three pairs as well as the two self-reconstruction pairs:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
        \mathcal{L}_{per} &= \mathcal{L}_{P}(S'', D) + \mathcal{L}_{P}(D'',S) + \mathcal{L}_{P}(S', D')\\
              &+ \mathcal{L}_{P}(e(S,S),S) + \mathcal{L}_{P}(p(S,S),S). \\
    \end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

**Expression loss $`\mathcal{L}_{E}`$.** To help with the disentanglement of pose and expression, inspired by spectre, an expression recognition network is utilized to obtain the feature vectors. Then we minimize the distance between the feature vectors of the ground-truth and intermediate synthetic images:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{exp} = \mathcal{L}_{E}(S', D) + \mathcal{L}_{E}(D', D).
\end{equation}
```

**GAN loss $`\mathcal{L}_{G}`$.** We adopt the non-saturating adversarial loss as our adversarial loss. We also use a discriminator to distinguish reconstructed images from the original ones:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{adv} = \mathcal{L}_{G}(S'') + \mathcal{L}_{G}(D'').
\end{equation}
```

Overall, the full objective function is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L} = \mathcal{L}_{rec} + \lambda_{p}\mathcal{L}_{per} + \lambda_{e}\mathcal{L}_{exp} + \mathcal{L}_{adv}, 
    \label{eq:first}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\lambda_{p}`$ and $`\lambda_{e}`$ are the trade-off hyper-parameters.

## References

1. Aayush Bansal, Shugao Ma, Deva Ramanan, and Yaser Sheikh.
\newblock Recycle-gan: Unsupervised video retargeting.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 119--135, 2018.
2. Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter.
\newblock A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH}, page 187–194, 1999.
3. Egor Burkov, Igor Pasechnik, Artur Grigorev, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Neural head reenactment with latent pose descriptors.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 13786--13795, 2020.
4. Lele Chen, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic
  pixel-wise loss.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 7832--7841, 2019.
5. Kun Cheng, Xiaodong Cun, Yong Zhang, Menghan Xia, Fei Yin, Mingrui Zhu, Xuan
  Wang, Jue Wang, and Nannan Wang.
\newblock Videoretalking: Audio-based lip synchronization for talking head
  video editing in the wild.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers}, pages 1--9, 2022.
6. Michail~Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia Sharmanska.
\newblock Headgan: One-shot neural head synthesis and editing.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, pages 14398--14407, 2021.
7. Nikita Drobyshev, Jenya Chelishev, Taras Khakhulin, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Victor
  Lempitsky, and Egor Zakharov.
\newblock Megaportraits: One-shot megapixel neural head avatars.
\newblock 2022.
8. Yao Feng, Haiwen Feng, Michael~J. Black, and Timo Bolkart.
\newblock Learning an animatable detailed {3D} face model from in-the-wild
  images.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 40(8), 2021.
9. Panagiotis~P. Filntisis, George Retsinas, Foivos Paraperas-Papantoniou,
  Athanasios Katsamanis, Anastasios Roussos, and Petros Maragos.
\newblock Visual speech-aware perceptual 3d facial expression reconstruction
  from videos, 2022.
10. Ohad Fried, Ayush Tewari, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, Adam Finkelstein, Eli
  Shechtman, Dan~B Goldman, Kyle Genova, Zeyu Jin, Christian Theobalt, and
  Maneesh Agrawala.
\newblock Text-based editing of talking-head video.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 38(4):1--14, 2019.
11. Jiahao Geng, Tianjia Shao, Youyi Zheng, Yanlin Weng, and Kun Zhou.
\newblock Warp-guided gans for single-photo facial animation.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 37(6):1--12, 2018.
12. Kuangxiao Gu, Yuqian Zhou, and Thomas Huang.
\newblock Flnet: Landmark driven fetching and learning network for faithful
  talking facial animation synthesis.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, volume~34, pages 10861--10868, 2020.
13. Sungjoo Ha, Martin Kersner, Beomsu Kim, Seokjun Seo, and Dongyoung Kim.
\newblock Marionette: Few-shot face reenactment preserving identity of unseen
  targets.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, volume~34, pages 10893--10900, 2020.
14. Fa-Ting Hong, Longhao Zhang, Li Shen, and Dan Xu.
\newblock Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head video
  generation.
\newblock 2022.
15. Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei.
\newblock Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 694--711. Springer, 2016.
16. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and
  Timo Aila.
\newblock Analyzing and improving the image quality of {StyleGAN}.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2020.
17. Hyeongwoo Kim, Mohamed Elgharib, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, Hans-Peter Seidel,
  Thabo Beeler, Christian Richardt, and Christian Theobalt.
\newblock Neural style-preserving visual dubbing.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 38(6):1--13, 2019.
18. Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Ayush Tewari, Weipeng Xu, Justus Thies, Matthias
  Niessner, Patrick P{\'e}rez, Christian Richardt, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, and
  Christian Theobalt.
\newblock Deep video portraits.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 37(4):1--14, 2018.
19. Diederik~P Kingma and Jimmy Ba.
\newblock Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2015.
20. Luming Ma and Zhigang Deng.
\newblock Real-time facial expression transformation for monocular rgb video.
\newblock In {\em Comput. Graph. Forum}, volume~38, pages 470--481. Wiley
  Online Library, 2019.
21. Arsha Nagrani, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identification dataset.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612}, 2017. [arXiv:1706.08612](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08612)
22. K~R Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P. Namboodiri, and C.V. Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, MM '20, page 484–492, New York, NY, USA, 2020.
  Association for Computing Machinery.
23. Albert Pumarola, Antonio Agudo, Aleix~M Martinez, Alberto Sanfeliu, and
  Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
\newblock Ganimation: Anatomically-aware facial animation from a single image.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 818--833, 2018.
24. Yurui Ren, Ge Li, Yuanqi Chen, Thomas~H Li, and Shan Liu.
\newblock Pirenderer: Controllable portrait image generation via semantic
  neural rendering.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, pages 13759--13768, 2021.
25. Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and
  Nicu Sebe.
\newblock First order motion model for image animation.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS}, December 2019.
26. Yang Song, Jingwen Zhu, Dawei Li, Xiaolong Wang, and Hairong Qi.
\newblock Talking face generation by conditional recurrent adversarial network.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04786}, 2018. [arXiv:1804.04786](https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.04786)
27. Zhiyao Sun, Yu-Hui Wen, Tian Lv, Yanan Sun, Ziyang Zhang, Yaoyuan Wang, and
  Yong-Jin Liu.
\newblock Continuously controllable facial expression editing in talking face
  videos.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.08289}, 2022. [arXiv:2209.08289](../2022/2209.08289.md)
28. Justus Thies, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, Matthias Nie{\ss}ner, Levi Valgaerts, Marc
  Stamminger, and Christian Theobalt.
\newblock Real-time expression transfer for facial reenactment.
\newblock {\em ACM TOG}, 34(6):183--1, 2015.
29. Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger, Christian Theobalt, and
  Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Face2face: Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 2387--2395, 2016.
30. Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Andrew Tao, Guilin Liu, Jan Kautz, and Bryan
  Catanzaro.
\newblock Few-shot video-to-video synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1910.12713}, 2019. [arXiv:1910.12713](https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.12713)
31. Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Guilin Liu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz,
  and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Video-to-video synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1808.06601}, 2018. [arXiv:1808.06601](https://arxiv.org/abs/1808.06601)
32. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video
  conferencing.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 10039--10049, 2021.
33. Yaohui Wang, Di Yang, Francois Bremond, and Antitza Dantcheva.
\newblock Latent image animator: Learning to animate images via latent space
  navigation.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2022.
34. Wayne Wu, Yunxuan Zhang, Cheng Li, Chen Qian, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Reenactgan: Learning to reenact faces via boundary transfer.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 603--619, 2018.
35. Guangming Yao, Yi Yuan, Tianjia Shao, Shuang Li, Shanqi Liu, Yong Liu, Mengmeng
  Wang, and Kun Zhou.
\newblock One-shot face reenactment using appearance adaptive normalization.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.03984}, 2021. [arXiv:2102.03984](../2021/2102.03984.md)
36. Guangming Yao, Yi Yuan, Tianjia Shao, and Kun Zhou.
\newblock Mesh guided one-shot face reenactment using graph convolutional
  networks.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, pages 1773--1781, 2020.
37. Fei Yin, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Mingdeng Cao, Yanbo Fan, Xuan Wang, Qingyan
  Bai, Baoyuan Wu, Jue Wang, and Yujiu Yang.
\newblock Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution editable talking face generation
  via pre-trained stylegan.
\newblock {\em arxiv:2203.04036}, 2022. [arXiv:2203.04036](../2022/2203.04036.md)
38. Egor Zakharov, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Aliaksandra Shysheya, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Fast bi-layer neural synthesis of one-shot realistic head avatars.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 524--540. Springer, 2020.
39. Egor Zakharov, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Burkov, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Few-shot adversarial learning of realistic neural talking head
  models.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, pages 9459--9468, 2019.
40. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei~A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang.
\newblock The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual
  metric.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 586--595, 2018.
41. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution
  audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 3661--3670, 2021.
42. Jian Zhao and Hui Zhang.
\newblock Thin-plate spline motion model for image animation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 3657--3666, 2022.
