---
arxiv_id: "2305.06225"
title:
  "DaGAN++: Depth-Aware Generative Adversarial Network for Talking Head Video
  Generation"
authors:
  - Fa-Ting Hong
  - Li Shen
  - Dan Xu
submitted: "2023-05-10"
categories:
  - cs.CV
  - cs.AI
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.06225
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 12/70
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-07T14:22:42+00:00"
references_parsed: 70
arxiv_version: ""
---

<figure id="fig:same-vox1" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="figure2/compare_same_id.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparisons on the self-reenactment experiment on the VoxCeleb1 dataset <span class="citation" data-cites="nagrani2017voxceleb"></span>. It can be observed that our method produces fewer artifacts than other competing methods (the first row) and captures better facial structures ( the eye regions in the third row).</figcaption>
</figure>

We verify the effectiveness of our proposed approach through comprehensive experiments conducted on multiple publicly accessible benchmarking datasets for talking head generation. In this section, we will illustrate the experimental setup first and then analyze our experimental results.

<figure id="fig:cross-hdtf" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure2/hdtf_cross_id.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparisons on the cross-identity reenactment experiments on the HDTF dataset <span class="citation" data-cites="zhang2021flow"></span>. DaGAN++ can capture better expression-related facial movements in the driving frame (, the eye and the mouth regions), because of the enhancement by our estimated accurate facial geometry.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Dataset description

We conduct experiments on three different face reenactment datasets (,  VoxCeleb1 , VoxCeleb2 , and HDTF  dataset) in this work.

**VoxCeleb1 dataset.** The VoxCeleb1 dataset is a largely collected audio-visual dataset originally for speaker identification and recognition tasks. The dataset includes a diverse range of speakers regarding age, gender, and ethnicity, covering a wide variety of accents and languages. It consists of a development and a test set. The development set contains $`1,211`$ identities, while the test set includes $`40`$ identities. Importantly, there is no speaker overlap between the two sets, ensuring a proper evaluation of the models on unseen data. The videos are not preprocessed for face detection or alignment, requiring models to handle the raw data. This makes the dataset challenging for talking head generation.

**VoxCeleb2 dataset.** VoxCeleb2  builds upon the original VoxCeleb1 dataset. It is designed for tasks like speaker identification, face recognition, and talking head generation. This dataset has more than $`1`$ million video clips from more than $`6,000`$ celebrities collected from YouTube, offering a diverse range of speakers across ages, genders, ethnicity, accents, and languages. There is no overlap between the two sets, ensuring a proper evaluation of models on unseen data. VoxCeleb2 videos are annotated with the speaker’s identity and unconstrained in terms of background noise, lighting, and head poses. This provides a challenging dataset that is more representative of real-world scenarios for various computer vision and speech-processing tasks.

**HDTF dataset.** The HDTF dataset  comprises approximately 362 distinct videos, with a total of 15.8 hours of content. The original videos have resolutions of either 720P or 1080P. A landmark detector is initially employed to isolate the facial region, with the crop window remaining consistent throughout each video. Subsequently, each cropped video is resized to a dimension of $`512 \times 512`$ to maintain visual quality.

<figure id="fig:cross-vox" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure2/vox_cross_id.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparisons of the cross-identity reenactment experiment on the VoxCeleb1 dataset <span class="citation" data-cites="nagrani2017voxceleb"></span>. Compared with other methods, our proposed DaGAN++ can maintain the background information better (see the second row) because the depth map is beneficial for distinguishing the foreground from the background. Utilizing accurate geometry information, our method can produce natural-looking results.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Metrics description

In this research, we employ various measures to evaluate the quality of the produced images. We use structural similarity (**SSIM**), peak signal-to-noise ratio (**PSNR**), and **LPIPS** to assess the visual resemblance between the generated images and the ground-truth images. Furthermore, we incorporate three additional metrics, namely **$`\mathcal{L}_1`$**, Average Keypoint Distance (**AKD**), and Average Euclidean Distance (**AED**), as suggested in , to evaluate methods based on keypoints.

## Implementation details

During the facial depth network learning process, the architecture of the pose network and the depth network is consistent with that of DaGAN . However, we append an uncertainty prediction head at the end of the pose network to estimate the uncertainty map. The uncertainty head implementation is shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:structure">[fig:structure]</a>f. In this work, our keypoint detector is similar to DaGAN , while we use the same structure as that in  for implementing the face depth network and the pose networks. Regarding the optimization losses, we assign $`\lambda_P`$ = 10, $`\lambda_E`$ = 10, and $`\lambda_D`$ = 10. The number of keypoints in DaGAN++ is set to 15. During the training phase, we initially train our enhanced uncertainty-guided facial depth network using consecutive frames from VoxCeleb1 videos and maintain it fixed throughout the training of the entire deep generation framework. In this work, we utilize the public code[^1] to process the raw data of the Voxceleb1 dataset.

## Comparison with state-of-the-art methods

<span id="tab:same-vox1" label="tab:same-vox1"></span>

<span id="tab:same-hdtf" label="tab:same-hdtf"></span>

<span id="tab:same-vox2" label="tab:same-vox2"></span>

<span id="tab:cross-vox" label="tab:cross-vox"></span>

<figure id="fig:depthvox1" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure2/depth-compare.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparisons of depth estimation on the VoxCeleb1 dataset <span class="citation" data-cites="nagrani2017voxceleb"></span>. It is clear that our improved face depth network generates more accurate depth maps compared to the original depth network used in DaGAN. Our depth map can precisely estimate the background pixels and maintain clearer structural details of the foreground human faces.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:uncertainty_map" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure2/uncertainty_map.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
<figcaption>Examples of the learned uncertainty maps for facial depth network learning. <span>The pixel value of the uncertainty map assigns lower uncertainty values to the rigid part of the face-moving pixels, while assigning higher values to the non-rigid region. By incorporating the uncertainty map, our model can filter out the non-rigid-motion pixels to better learn the dominant rigid motion between two views for depth learning.</span></figcaption>
</figure>

**Self-reenactment.** Firstly, we conduct the self-reenactment experiment to quantitatively evaluate our method. The results of the self-reenactment are reported in Table <a href="#tab:same-vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:same-vox1">[tab:same-vox1]</a>, Table <a href="#tab:same-vox2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:same-vox2">[tab:same-vox2]</a>, and Table <a href="#tab:same-hdtf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:same-hdtf">[tab:same-hdtf]</a>. We can observe that DaGAN++ gains the best performance compared with other methods on all the datasets. Compared with the DaGAN, our DaGAN++ gains a significant improvement in most of the metrics, , $`86.7\%`$ vs $`82.3\%`$ on the SSIM on the HDTF dataset. It verifies the effectiveness of our improved designs upon DaGAN. In comparison to other model-free approaches (FOMM , MRAA , and TPSM ), our DaGAN++ model is capable of capturing precise head movement. Our method achieves a score of $`1.675`$ on the AKD metric (lower is better) on the Voxceleb2 dataset, while the best score achieved by the comparison methods is $`1.703`$. This outcome confirms that our geometry-guided facial keypoints estimation can be used to more effectively generate the motion field between human faces. Moreover, our method continues to attain the best score of $`82.6\%`$ in terms of SSIM on Voxceleb1. This demonstrates that the proposal can recover finer facial details, such as expression and motion. Additionally, our method achieves top scores in other metrics, namely LPIPS, $`\mathcal{L}_1`$ error, and PSNR, indicating that our approach can generate more lifelike images compared to those competing methods. Beyond the quantitative comparison, we also visualize some samples in Fig. <a href="#fig:same-vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:same-vox1">1</a>. From the generated faces in Fig. <a href="#fig:same-vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:same-vox1">1</a>, we can observe that our method produces more accurate results. Besides, our approach generates fewer artifacts, as can be seen in the first row in Fig. <a href="#fig:same-vox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:same-vox1">1</a>. The is mainly because of the robust facial depth information, which can help to learn better motion representations, suppress the noise from the background, and preserve 3D facial structures. Overall, the superior performance of DaGAN++ consistently shown across different datasets highlights its effectiveness in handling same-identity reenactment tasks compared to the competing methods.

**Cross-identity reenactment.** We also conduct experiments to investigate cross-identity motion transfer, where the source and driving images originate from different individuals. We qualitatively compare our method with others and show the visualizations in Fig. <a href="#fig:cross-hdtf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross-hdtf">2</a> and Fig. <a href="#fig:cross-vox" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross-vox">3</a>. For the faces in Fig. <a href="#fig:cross-vox" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross-vox">3</a> and Fig. <a href="#fig:cross-hdtf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross-hdtf">2</a>, our approach generates face images with finer details compared to the other methods, such as the eye regions in the three rows in Fig. <a href="#fig:cross-hdtf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross-hdtf">2</a>. This confirms that employing depth maps allows the model to recognize subtle facial expression movements. Our method can also produce visually appealing results for previously unseen targets. Notably, TPSM generates inferior results because it does not incorporate relative motion transfer  in facial animation. In comparison to DaGAN, the enhanced DaGAN++ produces clearly fewer artifacts while preserving the original background information from the source image, as shown in the second row in Fig. <a href="#fig:cross-vox" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:cross-vox">3</a>.

<figure id="fig:abla" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure2/vox1_ablation.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparisons of different ablation studies. We can observe that DaGAN++ can gradually improve the generation results by adding the contribution modules. The final full model achieves the highest-fidelity generations.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Ablation study

We also perform ablation studies to validate each component of our work. We show the results in Fig. <a href="#fig:depthvox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:depthvox1">4</a>, Fig. <a href="#fig:uncertainty_map" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:uncertainty_map">5</a>, Fig. <a href="#fig:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:abla">6</a>, Fig. <a href="#fig:feature-compare" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:feature-compare">7</a>, Fig. <a href="#fig:out-of-domain" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:out-of-domain">8</a>, Table <a href="#tab:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:abla">[tab:abla]</a> and Table <a href="#tab:hyper-kp" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:hyper-kp">[tab:hyper-kp]</a>. In Table <a href="#tab:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:abla">[tab:abla]</a>, “**w/ GMG**” refers to the utilization of the multi-layer cross-modal attention mechanism to incorporate geometry information into the generation process; “**w/ FDN++**” denotes the application of the improved face depth network for predicting the face depth map for geometry-guided sparse keypoints estimation. In this context, our baseline corresponds to the basic model that is trained without the face depth maps and the cross-modal attention module.

###

**Depth results.** In this study, we present improved designs for learning a more accurate facial depth estimation network compared to DaGAN. Due to the absence of ground truth data, we employ a self-supervised method for facial depth estimation. It is tricky to quantitatively evaluate the depth estimation performance due to the unavailability of ground-truth depth data, and thus the depth map’s quality can only be assessed qualitatively through visualization. We show the estimated depth maps of DaGAN and DaGAN++ in Fig. <a href="#fig:depthvox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:depthvox1">4</a>. It is obvious that DaGAN++ produce more facial structure details in the depth maps compared to DaGAN. Furthermore, DaGAN++’s depth maps successfully eliminate the background, as demonstrated in the fifth column of Fig. <a href="#fig:depthvox1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:depthvox1">4</a>. These findings suggest that our self-supervised facial depth learning technique can effectively recover the dense 3D geometry of human faces, which can be advantageous for subsequent talking head generation tasks.

**Uncertainty map learning.** In our self-supervised depth learning method, we propose to learn an uncertainty map to indicate the probability of reliable and dominated rigid-motion pixel region of the face image. We report several samples in Fig. <a href="#fig:uncertainty_map" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:uncertainty_map">5</a>. Recalling the form of the depth learning objective (see Equation <a href="#eq:depth_loss" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:depth_loss">[eq:depth_loss]</a>), it will try to set uncertainty $`\mathcal{U}`$ to regularize the photometric consistency error. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:uncertainty_map" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:uncertainty_map">5</a>, we can observe that pixels that occur more reliably rigid motions will be learned to assign smaller uncertainties, and then produce larger weights for the photometric consistency errors of those pixels. It verifies our motivation by learning the uncertainty map to represent rigid and non-rigid moving pixels with different important scores.

<figure id="fig:feature-compare" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure2/ab_feature_map.pdf" style="width:98.0%" />
<figcaption>Investigation on the intermediate feature maps during generation. The features after our geometry enhancement can preserve more facial structures and details, and better perceive the background regions of the scene.</figcaption>
</figure>

<span id="tab:abla" label="tab:abla"></span>

**Effectiveness of improved depth maps.** As previously mentioned, accurate facial geometry information can greatly facilitate the preservation of facial structures. In this paper, we propose an enhanced face-depth learning method that substantially improves the performance compared to DaGAN, as illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:depth_estimate" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:depth_estimate">[fig:depth_estimate]</a>. To quantitatively verify the effectiveness of our improved face depth network, we replace the original face depth network with the enhanced one in DaGAN. As demonstrated in Table <a href="#tab:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:abla">[tab:abla]</a>, the component of DaGAN (, “FDN” and “CAM”) with our enhanced face depth network, , “FDN++” and “CAM++”, achieves a noticeable improvement compared to the original DaGAN, confirming the effectiveness of the enhanced facial depth estimation network. These results indicate that accurate facial geometry can indeed improve the quality of talking head generation.

**Effectiveness of depth-guided keypionts estimation.** As discussed in the main paper, face depth is critically important for the keypoint estimation. We first quantitatively investigate the influence of depth maps on keypoint detection and present the corresponding results in Table <a href="#tab:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:abla">[tab:abla]</a>. From Table <a href="#tab:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:abla">[tab:abla]</a>, it is evident that the depth-guided keypoints stably contribute to our model’s performance across all the evaluation metrics compared to the baseline model, confirming the importance of depth maps for face keypoint estimation. From Fig. <a href="#fig:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:abla">6</a>, the "Baseline w/ FDN++" also shows a more accurate generation of facial expressions compared to the "Baseline", which suggests that the geometry-guided facial keypoints can help to produce more precise motion fields of human faces effectively.

###

**Effectiveness of geometry-enhanced multi-layer module .** By comparing the performances between the “baseline” and “Baseline w/ CAM”, we can verify the effectiveness of the cross-modal attention mechanism for talking head generation. In this work, we further deploy the cross-modal attention unit in each layer of the generation process, so that we can introduce geometry information into different levels of features for coarse-to-fine geometry-guided generation. From Table <a href="#tab:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:abla">[tab:abla]</a> and Fig. <a href="#fig:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:abla">6</a>, the geometry-enhanced multi-layer generation (GMG) can clearly boost the quality of the output human faces. Moreover, benefiting from the face geometry, our method can preserve the expression-related micro-motion of the face. Compared to the “Baseline”, the “Baseline w/ GMG” can produce more realistic-looking expressions ( at eye regions). From Table <a href="#tab:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:abla">[tab:abla]</a> and Fig. <a href="#fig:abla" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:abla">6</a>, we can verify that our proposed geometry-enhanced multi-layer generation process can effectively embed the face geometry into the generation process to capture critical movement (, expressions) of the human face, thus leading to higher-quality face generation.

**Impact of depth maps on generation features.** We also visualize the intermediate generation feature maps from the generator to verify the impact of our geometry enhancement. We show the generation features before and after applying the geometry enhancement module.

**Out-of-domain results.**

<figure id="fig:out-of-domain" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figure2/out-of-domain.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative results of out-of-domain generation.</figcaption>
</figure>

<span id="tab:hyper-kp" label="tab:hyper-kp"></span>

**The selection of keypoint number.**

**Evaluation of temporal consistency.**

```math
\begin{equation}
    TCM = \frac{1}{T}\sum_{t=1}^{T}\exp{-\frac{||\mathbf{I}_{GT}^t-\mathcal{W}_p(\mathbf{I}_{GT}^{t-1},\mathcal{T}_{t-1\leftarrow t})||}{||\mathbf{I}_{rst}^t-\mathcal{W}_p(\mathbf{I}_{rst}^{t-1},\mathcal{T}_{t-1\leftarrow t})||}-1}
\end{equation}
```

[^1]: https://github.com/AliaksandrSiarohin/video-preprocessing

## References

1. G.~Yao, Y.~Yuan, T.~Shao, and K.~Zhou, ``Mesh guided one-shot face reenactment
   using graph convolutional networks,'' in {\em ACM MM}, 2020.
2. F.~Yin, Y.~Zhang, X.~Cun, M.~Cao, Y.~Fan, X.~Wang, Q.~Bai, B.~Wu, J.~Wang, and
   Y.~Yang, ``Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution editable talking face
   generation via pretrained stylegan,'' {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.04036},
3. [arXiv:2203.04036](../2022/2203.04036.md)
4. E.~Zakharov, A.~Shysheya, E.~Burkov, and V.~Lempitsky, ``Few-shot adversarial
   learning of realistic neural talking head models,'' in {\em ICCV}, 2019.
5. R.~Zhao, T.~Wu, and G.~Guo, ``Sparse to dense motion transfer for face image
   animation,'' in {\em ICCV}, 2021.
6. Y.~Ren, G.~Li, Y.~Chen, T.~H. Li, and S.~Liu, ``Pirenderer: Controllable
   portrait image generation via semantic neural rendering,'' in {\em ICCV},
7.
8. B.~Zhang, C.~Qi, P.~Zhang, B.~Zhang, H.~Wu, D.~Chen, Q.~Chen, Y.~Wang, and
   F.~Wen, ``Metaportrait: Identity-preserving talking head generation with fast
   personalized adaptation,'' {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08062}, 2022. [arXiv:2212.08062](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08062)
9. L.~Tran and X.~Liu, ``Nonlinear 3d face morphable model,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2018.
10. E.~Wood, T.~Baltru{\v{s}}aitis, C.~Hewitt, M.~Johnson, J.~Shen,
    N.~Milosavljevi{\'c}, D.~Wilde, S.~Garbin, T.~Sharp, I.~Stojiljkovi{\'c},
    {\em et~al.}, ``3d face reconstruction with dense landmarks,'' in {\em ECCV},
11.
12. A.~Siarohin, S.~Lathuili{\`e}re, S.~Tulyakov, E.~Ricci, and N.~Sebe, ``First
    order motion model for image animation,'' {\em NeurIPS}, 2019.
13. T.-C. Wang, A.~Mallya, and M.-Y. Liu, ``One-shot free-view neural talking-head
    synthesis for video conferencing,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2021.
14. A.~Siarohin, O.~Woodford, J.~Ren, M.~Chai, and S.~Tulyakov, ``Motion
    representations for articulated animation,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2021.
15. F.-T. Hong, L.~Zhang, L.~Shen, and D.~Xu, ``Depth-aware generative adversarial
    network for talking head video generation,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2022.
16. Z.~Zhang, L.~Li, Y.~Ding, and C.~Fan, ``Flow-guided one-shot talking face
    generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset,'' in {\em CVPR},
17.
18. H.~Zhou, Y.~Liu, Z.~Liu, P.~Luo, and X.~Wang, ``Talking face generation by
    adversarially disentangled audio-visual representation,'' in {\em AAAI},
19.
20. S.~Wang, L.~Li, Y.~Ding, C.~Fan, and X.~Yu, ``Audio2head: Audio-driven one-shot
    talking-head generation with natural head motion,'' {\em arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2107.09293}, 2021. [arXiv:2107.09293](../2021/2107.09293.md)
21. Y.~Deng, J.~Yang, D.~Chen, F.~Wen, and X.~Tong, ``Disentangled and controllable
    face image generation via 3d imitative-contrastive learning,'' in {\em CVPR},
22.
23. H.~Zhou, Y.~Sun, W.~Wu, C.~C. Loy, X.~Wang, and Z.~Liu, ``Pose-controllable
    talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual
    representation,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2021.
24. L.~Chen, S.~Srivastava, Z.~Duan, and C.~Xu, ``Deep cross-modal audio-visual
    generation,'' in {\em ACM MM Workshops}, 2017.
25. H.~Zhao, C.~Gan, A.~Rouditchenko, C.~Vondrick, J.~McDermott, and A.~Torralba,
    ``The sound of pixels,'' in {\em ECCV}, 2018.
26. R.~Gao and K.~Grauman, ``2.5 d visual sound,'' in {\em Proceedings of the
    IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition},
    pp.~324--333, 2019.
27. H.~Zhao, C.~Gan, W.-C. Ma, and A.~Torralba, ``The sound of motions,'' in {\em
    ICCV}, 2019.
28. X.~Xu, B.~Dai, and D.~Lin, ``Recursive visual sound separation using minus-plus
    net,'' in {\em ICCV}, 2019.
29. C.~Gan, D.~Huang, H.~Zhao, J.~B. Tenenbaum, and A.~Torralba, ``Music gesture
    for visual sound separation,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2020.
30. C.~Gan, D.~Huang, P.~Chen, J.~B. Tenenbaum, and A.~Torralba, ``Foley music:
    Learning to generate music from videos,'' in {\em ECCV}, 2020.
31. J.~S. Chung, A.~Jamaludin, and A.~Zisserman, ``You said that?,'' {\em arXiv
    preprint arXiv:1705.02966}, 2017. [arXiv:1705.02966](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02966)
32. Y.~Song, J.~Zhu, D.~Li, X.~Wang, and H.~Qi, ``Talking face generation by
    conditional recurrent adversarial network,'' {\em arXiv preprint
    arXiv:1804.04786}, 2018. [arXiv:1804.04786](https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.04786)
33. P.~KR, R.~Mukhopadhyay, J.~Philip, A.~Jha, V.~Namboodiri, and C.~Jawahar,
    ``Towards automatic face-to-face translation,'' in {\em ACM MM}, 2019.
34. Y.~Zhou, X.~Han, E.~Shechtman, J.~Echevarria, E.~Kalogerakis, and D.~Li,
    ``Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation,'' {\em ACM Transactions
    On Graphics}, vol.~39, no.~6, pp.~1--15, 2020.
35. S.~Gururani, A.~Mallya, T.-C. Wang, R.~Valle, and M.-Y. Liu, ``Space:
    Speech-driven portrait animation with controllable expression,'' in {\em
    ICCV}, 2023.
36. Y.~Liu, L.~Lin, F.~Yu, C.~Zhou, and Y.~Li, ``Moda: Mapping-once audio-driven
    portrait animation with dual attentions,'' in {\em ICCV}, 2023.
37. C.~Lugaresi, J.~Tang, H.~Nash, C.~McClanahan, E.~Uboweja, M.~Hays, F.~Zhang,
    C.-L. Chang, M.~G. Yong, J.~Lee, {\em et~al.}, ``Mediapipe: A framework for
    building perception pipelines,'' {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08172}, 2019. [arXiv:1906.08172](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08172)
38. S.~Yao, R.~Zhong, Y.~Yan, G.~Zhai, and X.~Yang, ``Dfa-nerf: personalized
    talking head generation via disentangled face attributes neural rendering,''
    {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.00791}, 2022. [arXiv:2201.00791](../2022/2201.00791.md)
39. X.~Liu, Y.~Xu, Q.~Wu, H.~Zhou, W.~Wu, and B.~Zhou, ``Semantic-aware implicit
    neural audio-driven video portrait generation,'' in {\em ECCV}, 2022.
40. Y.~Guo, K.~Chen, S.~Liang, Y.-J. Liu, H.~Bao, and J.~Zhang, ``Ad-nerf: Audio
    driven neural radiance fields for talking head synthesis,'' in {\em ICCV},
41.
42. B.~Mildenhall, P.~P. Srinivasan, M.~Tancik, J.~T. Barron, R.~Ramamoorthi, and
    R.~Ng, ``Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
    synthesis,'' {\em Communications of the ACM}, vol.~65, no.~1, pp.~99--106,
43.
44. K.~Kim, Y.~Kim, S.~Cho, J.~Seo, J.~Nam, K.~Lee, S.~Kim, and K.~Lee, ``Diffface:
    Diffusion-based face swapping with facial guidance,'' {\em arXiv preprint
    arXiv:2212.13344}, 2022. [arXiv:2212.13344](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13344)
45. S.~Shen, W.~Zhao, Z.~Meng, W.~Li, Z.~Zhu, J.~Zhou, and J.~Lu, ``Difftalk:
    Crafting diffusion models for generalized talking head synthesis,'' 2023.
46. J.~Ho, A.~Jain, and P.~Abbeel, ``Denoising diffusion probabilistic models,''
    {\em NeurIPSl}, 2020.
47. M.~Stypu{\l}kowski, K.~Vougioukas, S.~He, M.~Zi{\k{e}}ba, S.~Petridis, and
    M.~Pantic, ``Diffused heads: Diffusion models beat gans on talking-face
    generation,'' {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.03396}, 2023. [arXiv:2301.03396](./2301.03396.md)
48. O.~Wiles, A.~Koepke, and A.~Zisserman, ``X2face: A network for controlling face
    generation using images, audio, and pose codes,'' in {\em ECCV}, 2018.
49. Y.~Zhang, S.~Zhang, Y.~He, C.~Li, C.~C. Loy, and Z.~Liu, ``One-shot face
    reenactment,'' {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.03251}, 2019. [arXiv:1908.03251](https://arxiv.org/abs/1908.03251)
50. E.~Burkov, I.~Pasechnik, A.~Grigorev, and V.~Lempitsky, ``Neural head
    reenactment with latent pose descriptors,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2020.
51. Q.~Wang, L.~Zhang, and B.~Li, ``Safa: Structure aware face animation,'' in {\em
    3DV}, 2021.
52. V.~Blanz and T.~Vetter, ``A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces,'' in
    {\em SIGGRAPH}, 1999.
53. J.~Booth, A.~Roussos, S.~Zafeiriou, A.~Ponniah, and D.~Dunaway, ``A 3d
    morphable model learnt from 10,000 faces,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2016.
54. Y.~Deng, J.~Yang, S.~Xu, D.~Chen, Y.~Jia, and X.~Tong, ``Accurate 3d face
    reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image
    set,'' in {\em CVPR Workshops}, 2019.
55. S.~Bounareli, C.~Tzelepis, V.~Argyriou, I.~Patras, and G.~Tzimiropoulos,
    ``Hyperreenact: one-shot reenactment via jointly learning to refine and
    retarget faces,'' in {\em ICCV}, 2023.
56. J.~Zhao and H.~Zhang, ``Thin-plate spline motion model for image animation,''
    in {\em CVPR}, 2022.
57. F.-T. Hong and D.~Xu, ``Implicit identity representation conditioned memory
    compensation network for talking head video generation,'' in {\em ICCV},
58.
59. Y.~Gong, Y.~Zhang, X.~Cun, F.~Yin, Y.~Fan, X.~Wang, B.~Wu, and Y.~Yang,
    ``Toontalker: Cross-domain face reenactment,'' in {\em ICCV}, 2023.
60. Y.~Wang, D.~Yang, F.~Bremond, and A.~Dantcheva, ``Latent image animator:
    Learning to animate images via latent space navigation,'' {\em ICLR}, 2022.
61. Z.~Liu, Y.~Lin, Y.~Cao, H.~Hu, Y.~Wei, Z.~Zhang, S.~Lin, and B.~Guo, ``Swin
    transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows,'' in {\em
    ICCV}, 2021.
62. H.~Fu, M.~Gong, C.~Wang, K.~Batmanghelich, and D.~Tao, ``Deep ordinal
    regression network for monocular depth estimation,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2018.
63. A.~Pilzer, D.~Xu, M.~Puscas, E.~Ricci, and N.~Sebe, ``Unsupervised adversarial
    depth estimation using cycled generative networks,'' in {\em 3DV}, 2018.
64. C.~Godard, O.~{Mac Aodha}, M.~Firman, and G.~J. Brostow, ``Digging into
    self-supervised monocular depth prediction,'' in {\em ICCV}, 2019.
65. H.~Ha, S.~Im, J.~Park, H.-G. Jeon, and I.~S. Kweon, ``High-quality depth from
    uncalibrated small motion clip,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2016.
66. X.~Luo, J.-B. Huang, R.~Szeliski, K.~Matzen, and J.~Kopf, ``Consistent video
    depth estimation,'' {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, vol.~39, no.~4,
    pp.~71--1, 2020.
67. D.~Xu, E.~Ricci, W.~Ouyang, X.~Wang, and N.~Sebe, ``Multi-scale continuous crfs
    as sequential deep networks for monocular depth estimation,'' in {\em CVPR},
68.
69. T.~Zhou, M.~Brown, N.~Snavely, and D.~G. Lowe, ``Unsupervised learning of depth
    and ego-motion from video,'' in {\em CVPR}, 2017.
70. A.~Gordon, H.~Li, R.~Jonschkowski, and A.~Angelova, ``Depth from videos in the
    wild: Unsupervised monocular depth learning from unknown cameras,'' in {\em
    ICCV}, 2019.
71. D.~Xu, A.~Vedaldi, and J.~F.~Henriques, ``Moving slam: Fully unsupervised deep
    learning in non-rigid scenes,'' in {\em IROS}, 2021.
72. Z.~Wang, A.~C. Bovik, H.~R. Sheikh, and E.~P. Simoncelli, ``Image quality
    assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,'' {\em TIP},
73.
74. J.~Johnson, A.~Alahi, and L.~Fei-Fei, ``Perceptual losses for real-time style
    transfer and super-resolution,'' in {\em ECCV}, 2016.
75. A.~Nagrani, J.~S. Chung, and A.~Zisserman, ``Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker
    identification dataset,'' {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612}, 2017. [arXiv:1706.08612](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08612)
76. J.~S. Chung, A.~Nagrani, and A.~Zisserman, ``Voxceleb2: Deep speaker
    recognition,'' {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}, 2018. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
77. J.~S. Chung, A.~Nagrani, and A.~Zisserman, ``Voxceleb2: Deep speaker
    recognition,'' in {\em Interspeech}, 2018.
78. A.~Siarohin, S.~Lathuili{\`e}re, S.~Tulyakov, E.~Ricci, and N.~Sebe,
    ``Animating arbitrary objects via deep motion transfer,'' in {\em CVPR},
79.
80. S.~Ha, M.~Kersner, B.~Kim, S.~Seo, and D.~Kim, ``Marionette: Few-shot face
    reenactment preserving identity of unseen targets,'' in {\em AAAI}, 2020.
81. S.~Varghese, Y.~Bayzidi, A.~Bar, N.~Kapoor, S.~Lahiri, J.~D. Schneider, N.~M.
    Schmidt, P.~Schlicht, F.~Huger, and T.~Fingscheidt, ``Unsupervised temporal
    consistency metric for video segmentation in highly-automated driving,'' in
    {\em CVPRW}, 2020.
82. G.~Bradski, ``The opencv library.,'' {\em Dr. Dobb's Journal: Software Tools
    for the Professional Programmer}, vol.~25, no.~11, pp.~120--123, 2000.
