---
arxiv_id: '2305.08293'
title: Identity-Preserving Talking Face Generation with Landmark and Appearance Priors
authors:
- Weizhi Zhong
- Chaowei Fang
- Yinqi Cai
- Pengxu Wei
- Gangming Zhao
- Liang Lin
- Guanbin Li
submitted: '2023-05-15'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.MM
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.08293
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 7/45
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:23:29+00:00'
references_parsed: 45
arxiv_version: ''
---

<div class="table*">

</div>

# Experiments

## Experimental Settings

**Implementation Details.** When generating landmarks from audio, we utilize the mediapipe tool  to detect facial landmarks from each video frame, where $`n_l=41`$, $`n_j=16`$, $`n_r=131`$, and $`n_p=74`$. Following , we calculate Mel-spectrograms from 16kHz audios using a window size of 800 and hop size of 200. $`N_l`$ is set to 15, and $`d`$ is 512. To render videos from landmarks, $`128\times128`$ face images (i.e., $`H=W=128`$) are generated at 25 fps, and $`k`$ is set to 2. The number of reference images $`N`$ is set to 3 during training and $`1/5`$ of the video length during inference. More details about network architectures and hyper-parameters are included in the supplementary document.

**Dataset.** Two audio-visual speech recognition datasets, LRS2 and LRS3 , are used in our experiments.

- **LRS2** . The dataset consists of 48,164 video clips from outdoor shows on BBC television. Each video is accompanied by an audio corresponding to a sentence with up to 100 characters. The training, validation, and test sets are split based on broadcast date, including 45,839, 1,082, and 1,243 videos, respectively. We sample 45 videos from the test set for evaluating algorithms quantitatively.

- **LRS3** . This dataset consists of 151,819 videos from indoor shows of TED or TEDx. There exists no overlap between LRS2 and LRS3. The videos of the two datasets are distinct in shooting scenes, lighting conditions, actions, etc. Thus, we sample 45 videos from LRS3 to test the generalization ability of talking face generation methods.

<figure id="fig:Qualitative" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="Figure/quaility_compare.pdf" style="width:75.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparisons with state-of-the-art person-generic methods on LRS2 <span class="citation" data-cites="Afouras18c"></span> and LRS3 <span class="citation" data-cites="Afouras18d"></span> datasets. Our method produces realistic results with better identity preservation effect. More results are presented in the supplementary video. </figcaption>
</figure>

**Comparison Methods.** We compare our method against state-of-the-art methods  on the person-generic audio-driven talking face generation. **EAMM**  generates talking face videos with emotion control based on unsupervised motion representations. **PC-AVS**  can generate pose-controllable talking face videos based on modularized audio-visual representation. **Wav2Lip**  uses an encoder-decoder model learned via adversarial training to produce talking face videos. **MakeItTalk**  leverages 3D landmarks to animate portrait images according to the input audio. **ATVGnet**  takes advantage of 2D landmarks to generate talking face videos from the input audio and an identity frame. For more comparison settings, please refer to our supplementary document.

## Evaluation Metrics

**Visual Quality Metrics.** We use Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (**PSNR**) and Structured similarity (**SSIM**) to measure the similarity between generated and ground-truth images. Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (**LPIPS**) and Fréchet Inception Distance (**FID**) are employed to measure the feature-level similarity between generated and ground-truth images. We use the cosine similarity (**CSIM**) of identity vectors extracted by the face recognition network ArcFace  to evaluate the identity preservation ability.

**Lip Synchronization Metrics.** Following , we compute the normalized lip landmarks distance (**LipLMD**) between generated images and ground-truth images to evaluate the lip synchronization ability. When no ground-truth images exist, like in the video dubbing task, we employ SyncNet  to extract features from generated images and corresponding audio data and then calculate the **SyncScore**  between the two kinds of features. To a certain degree, this metric can convey how the lip shapes in generated images are coherent with the input audio.

## Quantitative Comparison

We conduct a quantitative comparison of reconstruction and dubbing settings. In the reconstruction setting, we input the original audio to reconstruct the talking face videos. In the dubbing setting, the input audio comes from another video. Note that there is no ground truth for dubbed videos. Thus, quantitatively evaluating the generated results under the dubbing setting is challenging.

**Talking Face Reconstruction.**  The quantitative evaluation results are reported in Table <a href="#tab:table1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:table1">[tab:table1]</a>. It can be seen that our method achieves the best performance on all visual quality metrics. Especially in identity preservation, our method is significantly better than other methods by large margins on the CSIM metric. The CSIM of our method is 10.09% and 8.05% larger than that of the second-best method, Wav2lip, on LRS2 and LRS3, respectively. The reason is that our method can effectively leverage multiple reference images as well as landmark priors to provide more personalized facial attributes of a specific speaker, while other methods tend to generate the average facial attributes of the training dataset. Moreover, the LipLMD of our method is much smaller than those of other methods. This means that our method can generate more accurate facial landmarks as intermediate representation and the lip movement in our results is better synchronized with the input audio.

**Video Dubbing.** As shown in Table <a href="#tab:table1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:table1">[tab:table1]</a>, the SyncScore of our method is comparable to that of PC-AVS , which adopts specific contrastive learning strategies to pull close the visual and auditory features. Meanwhile, our method achieves a much higher SyncScore than other methods. This also validates that the lip shape generated by our method is well synchronized with the audio data.

## Qualitative Comparison

**User Study.** To validate the effect of our method qualitatively, we conduct a user study where 25 participants are invited to evaluate the generated videos. Five videos are selected from each dataset for evaluation. The input audio is chosen following the reconstruction setting. Each participant is asked to rate the generated video from 1 to 5 on three terms, including image quality, lip synchronization, and identity preservation. A higher score indicates a better result. The mean opinion scores (MOS) are presented in Table <a href="#tab:user_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:user_study">[tab:user_study]</a>. As can be observed, our method receives a better evaluation from participants than other methods. Specifically, the MOS of our method is 47.6%, 10.1%, and 23.4% higher than that of the second best method on image quality, lip synchronization, and identity preservation, respectively.

**Visualization of Generated Images.** Three examples generated under the talking face reconstruction setting are presented in Fig. <a href="#fig:Qualitative" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Qualitative">1</a>. Compared with other methods, our method can produce images that are visually closer to the ground truth. There also exist relatively less artifacts in our results. PC-AVS , Wav2Lip , MakeItTalk , and ATVGnet  fail to generate images that have consistent mouth shapes with the ground-truth images. EAMM  and PC-AVS tend to produce face images with moderate differences from ground truth images. For example, the eyes and wrinkles are apparently different from those in the ground truth images. Besides, the results of Wav2Lip and ATVGnet are a little blurry.

## Ablation Study

In this section, we conduct ablation studies on the LRS2 dataset to validate the effect of core components in our method and the performance gain derived by multiple reference images.

**Effectiveness of Transformer Encoder.** To demonstrate the advantage of the transformer encoder used in landmark generator, we implement a variant of our method by replacing the transformer encoder with a commonly used bidirectional LSTM . In this variant, reference embeddings are first averaged to form a global reference embedding as in . Then, the LSTM module takes the concatenation of pose embedding, audio embedding, and global reference embedding as input to predict the landmarks. Landmark error is calculated to evaluate the accuracy of predicted landmarks (see supplementary material for more details). As shown in Table <a href="#tab:ablation3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation3">[tab:ablation3]</a>, our transformer-based landmark generator (‘w/ Transformer’) performs better than the LSTM-based landmark generator (‘w/ LSTM’). This is because the transformer module is more advantageous at modeling the temporal dependencies and the relationships between landmark and audio features.

**Effectiveness of Warping and Audio feature.** We attempt to remove the warping mechanism in the alignment module and inject the misaligned reference images and features into the translation module. This forms a variant of our method indicated by ‘w/o warping’. As can be seen in Table <a href="#tab:ablation_1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation_1">[tab:ablation_1]</a>, it derives deteriorated visual quality metrics. Besides, the LipLMD metric also gets worse because misaligned reference images have negative impacts on inferring the lip shape. Moreover, without using audio feature to enhance the lip synchronization and mouth details in the translation module (i.e. ‘w/o audio’), both lip synchronization and visual quality metrics get worse.

**Number of Reference Images.** We try to vary the number of reference images $`N`$ during inference to assess the performance gain derived by multiple reference images. The experimental results are provided in Table <a href="#tab:ablation_2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation_2">[tab:ablation_2]</a>. We observe that using multiple reference images (5 to 25) gives rise to better metric values than using one reference image.

## References

1. T. Afouras, J.~S. Chung, A. Senior, O. Vinyals, and A. Zisserman.
\newblock Deep audio-visual speech recognition.
\newblock In {\em arXiv:1809.02108}, 2018. [arXiv:1809.02108](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.02108)
2. T. Afouras, J.~S. Chung, and A. Zisserman.
\newblock Lrs3-ted: a large-scale dataset for visual speech recognition.
\newblock In {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00496}, 2018. [arXiv:1809.00496](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00496)
3. Sandika Biswas, Sanjana Sinha, Dipanjan Das, and Brojeshwar Bhowmick.
\newblock Realistic talking face animation with speech-induced head motion.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Twelfth Indian Conference on Computer
  Vision, Graphics and Image Processing}, pages 1--9, 2021.
4. Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter.
\newblock A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques}, pages 187--194, 1999.
5. Lele Chen, Guofeng Cui, Celong Liu, Zhong Li, Ziyi Kou, Yi Xu, and Chenliang
  Xu.
\newblock Talking-head generation with rhythmic head motion.
\newblock In {\em European Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 35--51.
  Springer, 2020.
6. Lele Chen, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic
  pixel-wise loss.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 7832--7841, 2019.
7. Joon~Son Chung, Amir Jamaludin, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock You said that?
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02966}, 2017. [arXiv:1705.02966](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02966)
8. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Asian conference on computer vision}, pages 251--263.
  Springer, 2016.
9. Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
\newblock Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 4690--4699, 2019.
10. Michail~Christos Doukas, Evangelos Ververas, Viktoriia Sharmanska, and Stefanos
  Zafeiriou.
\newblock Free-headgan: Neural talking head synthesis with explicit gaze
  control.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.02210}, 2022. [arXiv:2208.02210](../2022/2208.02210.md)
11. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 5784--5794, 2021.
12. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
  Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash
  equilibrium.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
13. Sepp Hochreiter and J{\"u}rgen Schmidhuber.
\newblock Long short-term memory.
\newblock {\em Neural computation}, 9(8):1735--1780, 1997.
14. Xun Huang and Serge Belongie.
\newblock Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance
  normalization.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
  vision}, pages 1501--1510, 2017.
15. Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Wayne Wu, Feng Xu, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Eamm: One-shot emotional talking face via audio-based emotion-aware
  motion model.
\newblock In {\em ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings}, SIGGRAPH '22,
  2022.
16. Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xun Cao, and
  Feng Xu.
\newblock Audio-driven emotional video portraits.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 14080--14089, 2021.
17. Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei.
\newblock Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em European conference on computer vision}, pages 694--711.
  Springer, 2016.
18. Prajwal KR, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Jerin Philip, Abhishek Jha, Vinay
  Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock Towards automatic face-to-face translation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 27th ACM international conference on
  multimedia}, pages 1428--1436, 2019.
19. Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne Wu, and Bolei Zhou.
\newblock Semantic-aware implicit neural audio-driven video portrait
  generation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07786}, 2022. [arXiv:2201.07786](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07786)
20. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-head
  animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 40(6):1--17, 2021.
21. Camillo Lugaresi, Jiuqiang Tang, Hadon Nash, Chris McClanahan, Esha Uboweja,
  Michael Hays, Fan Zhang, Chuo-Ling Chang, Ming~Guang Yong, Juhyun Lee, et~al.
\newblock Mediapipe: A framework for building perception pipelines.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08172}, 2019. [arXiv:1906.08172](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08172)
22. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T Barron, Ravi
  Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
  synthesis.
\newblock {\em Communications of the ACM}, 65(1):99--106, 2021.
23. Se~Jin Park, Minsu Kim, Joanna Hong, Jeongsoo Choi, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Synctalkface: Talking face generation with precise lip-syncing via
  audio-lip memory.
\newblock In {\em 36th AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 22)}.
  Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence, 2022.
24. Taesung Park, Ming-Yu Liu, Ting-Chun Wang, and Jun-Yan Zhu.
\newblock Semantic image synthesis with spatially-adaptive normalization.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 2337--2346, 2019.
25. KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
26. Yurui Ren, Ge Li, Yuanqi Chen, Thomas~H Li, and Shan Liu.
\newblock Pirenderer: Controllable portrait image generation via semantic
  neural rendering.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 13759--13768, 2021.
27. Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Yueqi Duan, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11770}, 2022. [arXiv:2207.11770](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.11770)
28. Wenzhe Shi, Jose Caballero, Ferenc Husz{\'a}r, Johannes Totz, Andrew~P Aitken,
  Rob Bishop, Daniel Rueckert, and Zehan Wang.
\newblock Real-time single image and video super-resolution using an efficient
  sub-pixel convolutional neural network.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 1874--1883, 2016.
29. Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven~M Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
\newblock Synthesizing obama: learning lip sync from audio.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 36(4):1--13, 2017.
30. Jie Tang, Yiling Wu, Minglei Li, and Zhu Wang.
\newblock Talking face generation based on information bottleneck and
  complementary representations.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on
  Information \& Knowledge Management}, pages 3443--3447, 2021.
31. Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock In {\em European conference on computer vision}, pages 716--731.
  Springer, 2020.
32. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones,
  Aidan~N Gomez, {\L}ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.
\newblock Attention is all you need.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
33. Suzhen Wang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Xin Yu.
\newblock One-shot talking face generation from single-speaker audio-visual
  correlation learning.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence}, volume~36, pages 2531--2539, 2022.
34. Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan
  Catanzaro.
\newblock High-resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with
  conditional gans.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 8798--8807, 2018.
35. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video
  conferencing.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 10039--10049, 2021.
36. Zhou Wang, Alan~C Bovik, Hamid~R Sheikh, and Eero~P Simoncelli.
\newblock Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural
  similarity.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on image processing}, 13(4):600--612, 2004.
37. Tianyi Xie, Liucheng Liao, Cheng Bi, Benlai Tang, Xiang Yin, Jianfei Yang,
  Mingjie Wang, Jiali Yao, Yang Zhang, and Zejun Ma.
\newblock Towards realistic visual dubbing with heterogeneous sources.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 1739--1747, 2021.
38. Ran Yi, Zipeng Ye, Ruoyu Fan, Yezhi Shu, Yong-Jin Liu, Yu-Kun Lai, and Paul~L
  Rosin.
\newblock Animating portrait line drawings from a single face photo and a
  speech signal.
\newblock In {\em ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings}, pages 1--8, 2022.
39. Ran Yi, Zipeng Ye, Zhiyao Sun, Juyong Zhang, Guoxin Zhang, Pengfei Wan, Hujun
  Bao, and Yong-Jin Liu.
\newblock Predicting personalized head movement from short video and speech
  signal.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, 2022.
40. Chenxu Zhang, Yifan Zhao, Yifei Huang, Ming Zeng, Saifeng Ni, Madhukar
  Budagavi, and Xiaohu Guo.
\newblock Facial: Synthesizing dynamic talking face with implicit attribute
  learning.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision}, pages 3867--3876, 2021.
41. Jiangning Zhang, Liang Liu, Zhucun Xue, and Yong Liu.
\newblock Apb2face: Audio-guided face reenactment with auxiliary pose and blink
  signals.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 4402--4406. IEEE, 2020.
42. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei~A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang.
\newblock The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual
  metric.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 586--595, 2018.
43. Yuhan Zhang, Weihua He, Minglei Li, Kun Tian, Ziyang Zhang, Jie Cheng, Yaoyuan
  Wang, and Jianxing Liao.
\newblock Meta talk: Learning to data-efficiently generate audio-driven
  lip-synchronized talking face with high definition.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2022-2022 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 4848--4852. IEEE, 2022.
44. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei
  Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized
  audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 4176--4186, 2021.
45. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis,
  and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 39(6):1--15, 2020.
