---
arxiv_id: '2305.00787'
title: 'GeneFace++: Generalized and Stable Real-Time Audio-Driven 3D Talking Face
  Generation'
authors:
- Zhenhui Ye
- Jinzheng He
- Ziyue Jiang
- Rongjie Huang
- Jiawei Huang
- Jinglin Liu
- Yi Ren
- Xiang Yin
- Zejun Ma
- Zhou Zhao
submitted: '2023-05-01'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00787
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 10/50
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:23:47+00:00'
references_parsed: 50
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Preliminaries: GeneFace

Our proposed GeneFace++ follows the two-stage paradigm in GeneFace . Therefore, in this section, we introduce preliminary knowledge about the *audio-to-motion* and *motion-to-video* stage in GeneFace.

**Audio-to-Motion** At the *audio-to-motion* stage, GeneFace first learns a conditional variational auto-encoder (VAE) model in a large-scale lip-reading dataset to achieve generalized and accurate facial landmark prediction given various audios. Specifically, the training loss of the VAE is:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{VAE}}=\mathbb{E}[ ||\mathbf{l} - \hat{\mathbf{l}}||_2^2  + {KL}(z| \hat{z}) + l_{Sync}(\textbf{a}, \hat{\mathbf{l}}) ] , ~~ s.t. ~~~~ z\sim N(0,1), 
    \label{eq:vae}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\textbf{a}`$ is the input audio and $`\mathbf{l}`$ is the corresponding GT facial landamrk. $`Enc`$ and $`Dec`$ denote the encoder and decoder in VAE, respectively. $`\hat{z}={Enc}(\mathbf{l}, \textbf{a})`$ is the latent encoding of GT landmark and $`\hat{\mathbf{l}}={Dec}(\hat{z}, \textbf{a})`$ is the predicted facial landmark. $`KL`$ denotes KL divergence and $`l_{Sync}`$ is a perceptual loss that measures the audio-visual synchronization, which is provided by a pretrained sync expert . After training, the encoder is discarded and only the decoder is needed to predict the facial landmark given the input audio.

To overcome the significant domain gap between the large-scale lip-reading dataset and the target person video, GeneFace adopts adversarial domain adaptation to learn a domain adaptative (DA) Postnet that projects the predicted facial motion into the target person domain. The training loss of DA Postnet is:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{Postnet}}=\mathbb{E}[ l_{Adv}(\overline{\mathbf{l}})) + l_{Sync}(\textbf{a}, \overline{\mathbf{l}})] , ~~s.t.~~\overline{\mathbf{l}}=PN(\hat{\mathbf{l}}),
    \label{eq:pn}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}`$ represents the refined landmark generated by the DA Postnet and $`{PN}`$ is the Postnet (a shallow 1D convolutional neural network) to be trained. $`\hat{\mathbf{l}}={Dec}(z, \textbf{a})`$ is the facial landmark generated by the VAE decoder and $`z`$ is the noise sampled from normalized gaussian distribution. $`l_{Adv}`$ is the LSGAN-styled adversarial loss, whose objective is to minimize the distance between the refined landmark distribution and the GT target person landmark set.

Once the training of the DA Postnet is done, the audio-to-motion module, which consists of a VAE decoder followed by a DA Postnet, could generate lip-sync and personalized facial landmarks given the input audio:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \overline{\mathbf{l}}=PN(\hat{\mathbf{l}}) = PN(Dec(z, \textbf{a})).
\end{equation}
```

**Motion-to-Video** As for the *motion-to-video* stage, GeneFace designs a landmark-conditioned dynamic NeRF network to render the human portrait given the input facial landmark. Specifically, it learns an implicit function $`F`$ which can be formulated as follows:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    F: (x,d,\mathbf{l})\rightarrow (c, \sigma),
\end{equation}
```
where $`x`$ and $`d`$ are positions and view direction. $`\mathbf{l}`$ is the facial landmark that morphs the human head, which is implicitly modeled in the function $`F`$. $`c`$ and $`\sigma`$ denote the predicted color and density in the 3D radiance field. We can conveniently render an image from this radiance field via a differentiable volume rendering equation that aggregates the color $`c`$ along the ray $`r`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    C(r, \mathbf{l})=\int_{t_n}^{t_f} \sigma(r(t),\mathbf{l})\cdot c(r(t),\mathbf{l},d)\cdot T(t)dt ,
    \label{eq:render_image}
\end{equation}
```
where $`C`$ is the RGB value of the pixel that corresponds to the ray $`r`$ emitted in the 3D space. $`t_n`$ and $`t_r`$ are the near bound and far bound of the ray. $`r(t)`$ is a shorthand of the position $`x`$ and direction $`d`$ at the sampled point $`t`$ of the ray. $`T(t)=\exp(-\int_{t_n}^{t}\sigma(r(\tau), \mathbf{l})d\tau)`$ is the accumulated transmittance along the ray from $`t_n`$ to $`t`$. Now that the image could be rendered, the training objective of NeRF is to reduce the L2 error between the rendered and ground-truth images:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{NeRF}}=\mathbb{E}[ ||C(r,\mathbf{l})-C_g||^2_2 ].
    \label{eq:train_nerf}
\end{equation}
```
During inference, by cascading through the *audio-to-motion* module and the *motion-to-video* module, GeneFace achieves to generate lip-sync and high-fidelity talking face video to various OOD audios.

# GeneFace++

In this section, we introduce the architecture of GeneFace++, which aims to improve GeneFace to achieve more natural *audio-lip synchronization*, more robust *video quality*, and higher *system efficiency*. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig: overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: overall">1</a>(a), GeneFace++ is composed of three parts: 1) a *pitch-aware audio-to-motion* module that transforms audio features into facial motion; 2) a *landmark locally linear embedding* method to post-process the predicted motion; and 3) an *instant motion-to-video* module that could render the final talking face video efficiently. We describe the designs and the training process of these three parts in detail in the following subsections. We provide detailed network structures in Appendix <a href="#app:structure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:structure">[app:structure]</a>.

<figure id="fig: overall" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="figures/geneface++.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
<figcaption>The inference process of GeneFace++. In subfigure (a), we show the overall three-stage pipeline. In subfigure (b), "DA Postnet" denotes the Domain Adaptative Postnet proposed in GeneFace. In subfigure (c), "KNN" denotes finding the K-nearest neighbors of the input landmark, and "Landmark LLE Proj." denotes Landmark Locally Linear Embedding Projection method proposed in Section <a href="#sec:lle" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:lle">2.2</a>. In subfigure (d), as for the <em>indexing</em> operation, we perform bi-linear interpolation to query the continuous coordinates in the discrete (spatial/hyper) grids. </figcaption>
</figure>

## Pitch-Aware Audio-to-Motion Transform

The motivation for considering pitch information in the audio-to-motion mapping is that pitch is known to highly correlated to facial expressions . For instance, a high and steady pitch contour may correlate to a large and steady lip motion. Then we further found two advantages of using pitch in the audio-to-motion module: (1) We notice that previous NeRF-based methods utilize phonetic posteriorgrams features as the audio feature to ease the training and improve cross-lingual cross-identity generalizability. However, since PPGs is intended for ASR usage, it ignores the acoustic information in the waveform, which is necessary to achieve stable and expressive facial motion prediction. Under this circumstance, auxiliary acoustic features such as pitch contours are helpful to improve the expressiveness and temporary consistency of the predicted facial motion. (2) The second reason to introduce pitch information is the observation of the unstable performance of the DA Postnet in GeneFace: the Postnet is only provided with the predicted facial motion and is requested to project it into the target domain. It is hard for the Postnet to model this domain shift in its implicit space without any condition, which leads to unstable training and occasional bad cases. We suggest that the pitch information could act as a lightweight and helpful hint for the Postnet to better process the input facial landmark.

<figure id="fig: audio2motion" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="figures/audio2motion.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
<figcaption>The training process of the Pitch-Aware Audio-to-Motion module. Learnable models are marked with red dotted rectangles and parameter-frozen models are colored in gray. In subfigure (a), Enc. and Dec. denote Encoder and Decoder in VAE, respectively. Disc. means Discriminator. In subfigure (b), the thunder-like symbol represents the "stop gradient" operator. In subfigure(c), "Log-Discretize" denotes the operation that quantizes the log-scale continuous pitch value into discrete tokens. </figcaption>
</figure>

**Pitch Encoder** As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig: audio2motion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: audio2motion">2</a>(c), we design a pitch encoder to effectively extract information from the pitch encoder. The key idea to designing the pitch encoder is to keep it lightweight and efficient. To be specific, we first discretize the continuous pitch (fundamental frequency) value into several discrete tokens to ensure temporary smoothness and ease the training of the pitch encoder. Note that we discretize the bins in log-scale to adhere to human perception. A group of pitch embedding corresponding to the discrete pitch tokens is learned from scratch during the training of the *pitch-aware VAE* (discussed latter). The pitch embedding is fed into a shallow convolutional network, which consists of a 1D convolutional layer with batch normalization and GeLU activation, and an extra 1D convolutional layer to produce the final pitch encoding.

**Pitch-Aware VAE** As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig: audio2motion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: audio2motion">2</a>(a), we plug the pitch encoder as an auxiliary condition encoder into the audio-to-motion VAE. We train the pitch encoder and VAE on a large-scale lip-reading dataset following Equation <a href="#eq:vae" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:vae">[eq:vae]</a>. During inference, the pitch encoder and VAE decoder are used to predict the facial landmark:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \hat{\mathbf{l}} = Dec(z, \textbf{h}, PE(\textbf{p})) , ~~ s.t. ~~~~ z\sim N(0,1), 
    \label{eq:pitch_dec}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\textbf{h}`$ and $`\textbf{p}`$ are the HuBERT feature and pitch value extracted from the input audio. $`PE`$ represents the pitch encoder.

**Pitch-Aware DA Postnet** As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig: audio2motion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: audio2motion">2</a>(b), the pretrained pitch encoder provides the auxiliary pitch encoding to the DA Postnet. We train the DA Postnet following Equation <a href="#eq:pn" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:pn">[eq:pn]</a>. Since the supervision signal of the adversarial training process is known to be unstable, we fix the parameters of the pitch encoder and VAE decoder to prevent deteriorated performance. During inference, as shown in Figure <a href="#fig: overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: overall">1</a>(a), the pitch-aware decoder and DA Postnet could generate personalized facial landmark $`\overline{l}`$ given the input audio:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \overline{\mathbf{l}} = PN(\hat{\mathbf{l}}, PE(\textbf{p})),
\end{equation}
```
where $`\hat{\mathbf{l}}`$ is the facial landmark predicted by decoder in Equation <a href="#eq:pitch_dec" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:pitch_dec">[eq:pitch_dec]</a>.

**Training** We follow the major setting of GeneFace to train the VAE and Postnet with two modifications: (1)To remove the jitter in the predicted landmark, inspired by FACIAL, we encourage the VAE to optimize the velocity of the landmark sequence. Specifically, a temporal smoothing term is added to the training objective of VAE. (2) To stabilize the adversarial training, we adopt the gradient penalty in WGAN-GP when updating the discriminator of Postnet. Due to spatial limitation, we illustrate the modified training loss in Appendix <a href="#app:loss_audio2motion" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:loss_audio2motion">[app:loss_audio2motion]</a>.

## Landmark Locally Linear Embedding

By introducing pitch information into the audio-to-motion module, we have improved the temporal consistency and naturalness of the predicted landmark. However, improving the quality of predicted landmarks is not adequate to achieve *good video quality*, as it requires the NeRF-based motion-to-video module to accurately render the human portrait corresponding to the assigned facial motion. This NeRF-based renderer, however, is typically learned from a very small dataset (a few-minute-long video), hence are expected to only work well on a narrow input space of facial landmark. When confronted with OOD landmarks, the renderer may produce inaccurate facial motion or even crashed rendering results. GeneFace utilize adversarial domain adaptation to train a Postnet to map all landmarks into the NeRF’s narrow input space. However, due to the instability of adversarial training, it is not theoretically guaranteed to correctly project every frame into the target domain, and bad case occurs occasionally, which raises robust challenges to real-world applications.

In this context, as shown in Figure <a href="#fig: overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: overall">1</a>(c), we propose *landmark locally linear embedding* (Landmark LLE), a manifold projection-based post-processing method that guarantees each predicted landmark is successfully mapped into (the vicinity of) the input space of the landmark-conditioned renderer. In other words, with the help of Landmark LLE, each predicted landmark is dragged closer to the GT landmark set that is used to train the renderer. We follow the main idea of the classic locally linear embedding (LLE) algorithm on the facial representation manifold: each facial landmark and its neighbors are locally-linear on the manifold. Motivated by the success of 3DMM, which could reconstruct arbitrary human face with a linear combination of around 144 template meshes, we assume that the facial landmark data points themselves are locally-linear, and there is no need to project them into a higher dimension manifold as vanilla LLE does. To be specific, given a predicted 3D facial landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}\in{\mathbb{R}^{68\times 3}}`$, the goal of Landmark LLE is to compute the reconstructed facial landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}^\prime\in{\mathbb{R}^{68\times 3}}`$on each dimension. As is illustrated in Figure <a href="#fig: overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: overall">1</a>(c), we first find the $`K`$ nearest landmark of the input landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}`$ in the GT landmark database $`\mathcal{D}\in \mathbb{R}^{N\times 68\times 3}`$ by computing the Euclidean distance, where $`N`$ is the number of landmark data points used to train the NeRF-based renderer. After obtaining the $`K`$ nearest neighbors $`\{\mathbf{l}_1,...,\mathbf{l}_K \}\subseteq \mathcal{D}`$, we then seek a linear combination of these neighbors to reconstruct $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}^\prime`$ by minimizing the reconstruction error $`||\overline{\mathbf{l}}-\overline{\mathbf{l}}^\prime||_2^2`$, which could be formulated as the following least-squared optimization problem:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \min ||\overline{\mathbf{l}}-\Sigma_{k=1}^K w_k \cdot \mathbf{l}_k||_2^2, ~~~~s.t. \Sigma_{k=1}^{K} w_k=1,
    \label{eq:least_square}
\end{equation}
```
where $`w_k`$ is the barycentric weight of the $`k`$-th nearest landmark $`\mathbf{l}_k`$. The optimial weights $`\mathbf{w}^*=\{w_1^*,...,w_K^*\}\in \mathbb{R}^{K}`$ can be obtained by solving Equation <a href="#eq:least_square" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:least_square">[eq:least_square]</a>. The hyper-parameter $`K`$ is chosen as 20 in our experiment via grid searching. Then we could compute the reconstructed facial landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}^\prime= \Sigma_{k=1}^K w_k^* \cdot \mathbf{l}_k`$. Ideally, the reconstructed landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}^{\prime}`$ can be regarded as an in-domain landmark data point that also possesses the semantic facial motion (such as eye blinking, laughing) in the input landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}`$, though with some information loss. In practice, during inference, we use a linear combination of originally predicted landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}`$ and reconstructed landmark $`\overline{\mathbf{l}}^\prime`$ as the final motion representation of the NeRF-based renderer:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \overline{\mathbf{l}}^{\prime\prime} = \overline{\mathbf{l}}^{\prime}\cdot \alpha + \overline{\mathbf{l}}\cdot(1-\alpha) = (\Sigma_{k=1}^K w_k^* \cdot \mathbf{l}_k)\cdot \alpha + \overline{\mathbf{l}}\cdot(1-\alpha),
    \label{eq:lle}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\alpha\in [0,1]`$ is a temperature hyper-parameter that tunes the trade-off between image quality and facial motion expressiveness: Intuitively, a large $`\alpha`$ would drag the $`l`$ closer to the GT dataset distribution and hence lead to better image quality and less rendering bad cases, while a smaller $`\alpha`$ would keep more details in the originally predicted landmark, which denotes more diverse and expressive facial motion. Our experiment results in Table <a href="#tab:ablation_lle" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation_lle">[tab:ablation_lle]</a> show that the proposed method helps improve our system’s robustness to predicted OOD landmarks. We provide a pseudo code of Landmark LLE in Appendix <a href="#app:lle" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="app:lle">[app:lle]</a>.

## Instant Motion-to-Video Rendering

In the previous sections, we obtain an expressive, time-consistent, and robust audio-to-motion mapping through the *pitch-aware audio-to-motion* module and *landmark LLE* postprocessing method. Next, we design an *instant motion-to-video* module to efficiently render video frames conditioned on the predicted 3D landmarks, which is shown in Figure <a href="#fig: overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: overall">1</a>(d).

**Grid-based NeRF Renderer** Recent progress in grid-based NeRF proposes to encode 3D spatial information with a learnable feature grid. Compared with vanilla NeRF which obtains the spatial features with dense MLP forwarding, this new paradigm could directly query the features in the continuous 3D space via linear interpolation in the discrete feature grid, which is more efficient in both the training and inference stage. Following , we utilize a learnable 3D grid to encode the queried position. Besides, an occupancy grid, which is a 3D grid that records the density value $`\sigma`$ estimated by NeRF, is maintained during training to prune the ray marching path. Since the utilization of a 3D feature grid eases the burden of NeRF to model the continuous spatial space, a lightweight grid-based NeRF could achieve comparable rendering quality with a deeper vanilla NeRF.

**Hyper-Space Landmark Encoder** To utilize the facial landmark to morph the human head in NeRF, some works adopt a conditional deformation field to warp the spatial points in the canonical space, which cannot model the non-rigid transform of the human head; GeneFace adopts a modulation-based method that directly concatenates the facial landmark and spatial features as the input to learn a landmark-conditioned NeRF. However, this method requires deep MLP forwarding (along with the input spatial feature) to accurately morph the head geometry, which is computationally expensive and no longer feasible in a shallow grid-based NeRF. The motivation is to keep the accuracy of the input landmark to morph the head geometry while using a lightweight structure.

Inspired by Hyper-NeRF , as shown in Figure <a href="#fig: overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: overall">1</a>(d), we project the input facial landmark into an N-dimensional ambient coordinate conditioned on the grid-based spatial features, which allows an efficient fusion of spatial information and landmark condition. Once the ambient coordinate is obtained, instead of querying the landmark features with a dense MLP, we use an extra N-D learnable grid to improve efficiency. We empirically set $`N=3`$ via grid search, as a trade-off of performance and efficiency. The queried spatial features and landmark features are concatenated and fed into the NeRF backbone (a shallow MLP) to generate the density and color. Specifically, the implicit function can be formulated as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    F:(f_x, f_l, d)\rightarrow c, \sigma
\end{equation}
```
where $`f_x`$ and $`f_l`$ are the spatial/landmark feature queried from the grid, respectively. $`d`$ is the view direction. Then we could obtain a rendered image following the volume rendering technique illustrated in Equation <a href="#eq:render_image" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:render_image">[eq:render_image]</a> and train the renderer with Equation <a href="#eq:train_nerf" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:train_nerf">[eq:train_nerf]</a>.

## References

1. Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lrs3-ted: a large-scale dataset for visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00496}, 2018. [arXiv:1809.00496](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00496)
2. Eric~R. Chan, Connor~Z. Lin, Matthew~A. Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini
  De~Mello, Orazio Gallo, Leonidas~J. Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis,
  Tero Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein.
\newblock Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 16123--16133, June 2022.
3. Eric~R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon Wetzstein.
\newblock pi-gan: Periodic implicit generative adversarial networks for
  3d-aware image synthesis.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2021.
4. Lele Chen, Guofeng Cui, Ziyi Kou, Haitian Zheng, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock What comprises a good talking-head video generation?: A survey and
  benchmark.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.03201}, 2020. [arXiv:2005.03201](../2020/2005.03201.md)
5. Lele Chen, Zhiheng Li, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Lip movements generation at a glance.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 520--535, 2018.
6. Lele Chen, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic
  pixel-wise loss.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 7832--7841, 2019.
7. Liyang Chen, Zhiyong Wu, Jun Ling, Runnan Li, Xu~Tan, and Sheng Zhao.
\newblock Transformer-s2a: Robust and efficient speech-to-animation.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP}, 2022.
8. Shu-Yu Chen, Wanchao Su, Lin Gao, Shihong Xia, and Hongbo Fu.
\newblock Deepfacedrawing: Deep generation of face images from sketches.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 39(4):72--1, 2020.
9. Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias Niessner.
\newblock Dynamic neural radiance fields for monocular 4d facial avatar
  reconstruction.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 8649--8658, June 2021.
10. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
  Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial networks.
\newblock {\em Communications of the ACM}, 63(11):139--144, 2020.
11. Ishaan Gulrajani, Faruk Ahmed, Martin Arjovsky, Vincent Dumoulin, and Aaron~C
  Courville.
\newblock Improved training of wasserstein gans.
\newblock {\em NIPS}, 2017.
12. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, pages 5784--5794, 2021.
13. Awni Hannun, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Greg Diamos, Erich
  Elsen, Ryan Prenger, Sanjeev Satheesh, Shubho Sengupta, Adam Coates, et~al.
\newblock Deep speech: Scaling up end-to-end speech recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.5567}, 2014. [arXiv:1412.5567](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.5567)
14. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
  Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash
  equilibrium.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
15. Yang Hong, Bo~Peng, Haiyao Xiao, Ligang Liu, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Headnerf: A real-time nerf-based parametric head model.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 20374--20384, June 2022.
16. Wei-Ning Hsu, Yao-Hung~Hubert Tsai, Benjamin Bolte, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
  Abdelrahman Mohamed.
\newblock Hubert: How much can a bad teacher benefit asr pre-training?
\newblock In {\em ICASSP}, 2021.
17. Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei~A Efros.
\newblock Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2017.
18. Amir Jamaludin, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock You said that?: Synthesising talking faces from audio.
\newblock {\em International Journal of Computer Vision}, 127(11):1767--1779,
  2019.
19. Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Wayne Wu, Feng Xu, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Eamm: One-shot emotional talking face via audio-based emotion-aware
  motion model.
\newblock In {\em ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings}, pages 1--10, 2022.
20. Diederik~P Kingma and Max Welling.
\newblock Auto-encoding variational bayes.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114}, 2013. [arXiv:1312.6114](https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114)
21. Cheng-Han Lee, Ziwei Liu, Lingyun Wu, and Ping Luo.
\newblock Maskgan: Towards diverse and interactive facial image manipulation.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 5549--5558, 2020.
22. Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu
  Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual
  control.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, 2022.
23. Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne Wu, and Bolei Zhou.
\newblock Semantic-aware implicit neural audio-driven video portrait
  generation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07786}, 2022. [arXiv:2201.07786](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07786)
24. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-head
  animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 40(6):1--17, 2021.
25. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T Barron, Ravi
  Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 405--421. Springer, 2020.
26. Thomas M{\"u}ller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller.
\newblock Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash
  encoding.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 41(4):1--15, 2022.
27. Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan~T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan~B Goldman,
  Steven~M Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla.
\newblock Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
28. Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan~T Barron, Sofien Bouaziz,
  Dan~B Goldman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven~M Seitz.
\newblock Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for topologically
  varying neural radiance fields.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13228}, 2021. [arXiv:2106.13228](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.13228)
29. Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami Romdhani, and Thomas Vetter.
\newblock A 3d face model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition.
\newblock In {\em 2009 sixth IEEE international conference on advanced video
  and signal based surveillance}, pages 296--301. Ieee, 2009.
30. KR~Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV~Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In {\em ACM MM}, pages 484--492, 2020.
31. Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
\newblock D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for dynamic scenes.
\newblock In {\em CVPR}, pages 10318--10327, 2021.
32. Sam~T Roweis and Lawrence~K Saul.
\newblock Nonlinear dimensionality reduction by locally linear embedding.
\newblock {\em science}, 290(5500):2323--2326, 2000.
33. Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Yueqi Duan, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
34. Yasheng Sun, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Hideki Koike.
\newblock Speech2talking-face: Inferring and driving a face with synchronized
  audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em IJCAI}, 2021.
35. Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven~M Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
\newblock Synthesizing obama: learning lip sync from audio.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 36(4):1--13, 2017.
36. Anni Tang, Tianyu He, Xu~Tan, Jun Ling, Runnan Li, Sheng Zhao, Li~Song, and
  Jiang Bian.
\newblock Memories are one-to-many mapping alleviators in talking face
  generation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.05005}, 2022. [arXiv:2212.05005](../2022/2212.05005.md)
37. Jiaxiang Tang, Kaisiyuan Wang, Hang Zhou, Xiaokang Chen, Dongliang He, Tianshu
  Hu, Jingtuo Liu, Gang Zeng, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Real-time neural radiance talking portrait synthesis via
  audio-spatial decomposition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12368}, 2022. [arXiv:2211.12368](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12368)
38. Samuli Laine Antti~Herva Tero~Karras, Timo~Aila and Jaakko Lehtinen.
\newblock Audio-driven facial animation by joint endto-end learning of pose and
  emotion.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 36(4), 2017.
39. Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, pages 716--731. Springer, 2020.
40. William~Forde Thompson, Frank~A Russo, and Steven~R Livingstone.
\newblock Facial expressions of singers influence perceived pitch relations.
\newblock {\em Psychonomic bulletin \& review}, 17(3):317--322, 2010.
41. Haozhe Wu, Jia Jia, Haoyu Wang, Yishun Dou, Chao Duan, and Qingshan Deng.
\newblock Imitating arbitrary talking style for realistic audio-driven talking
  face synthesis.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 1478--1486, 2021.
42. Zhenhui Ye, Ziyue Jiang, Yi~Ren, Jinglin Liu, JinZheng He, and Zhou Zhao.
\newblock Geneface: Generalized and high-fidelity audio-driven 3d talking face
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em ICLR}, 2023.
43. Zhenhui Ye, Zhou Zhao, Yi~Ren, and Fei Wu.
\newblock Syntaspeech: syntax-aware generative adversarial text-to-speech.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.11792}, 2022. [arXiv:2204.11792](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.11792)
44. Ran Yi, Zipeng Ye, Juyong Zhang, Hujun Bao, and Yong-Jin Liu.
\newblock Audio-driven talking face video generation with learning-based
  personalized head pose.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10137}, 2020. [arXiv:2002.10137](../2020/2002.10137.md)
45. Fei Yin, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Mingdeng Cao, Yanbo Fan, Xuan Wang, Qingyan
  Bai, Baoyuan Wu, Jue Wang, and Yujiu Yang.
\newblock Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution editable talking face generation
  via pre-trained stylegan.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
46. Lingyun Yu, Jun Yu, Mengyan Li, and Qiang Ling.
\newblock Multimodal inputs driven talking face generation with
  spatial--temporal dependency.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology},
  31(1):203--216, 2020.
47. Chenxu Zhang, Yifan Zhao, Yifei Huang, Ming Zeng, Saifeng Ni, Madhukar
  Budagavi, and Xiaohu Guo.
\newblock Facial: Synthesizing dynamic talking face with implicit attribute
  learning.
\newblock In {\em ICCV}, 2021.
48. Hang Zhou, Yu~Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang.
\newblock Talking face generation by adversarially disentangled audio-visual
  representation.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, 2019.
49. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis,
  and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 39(6):1--15, 2020.
50. Yiyu Zhuang, Hao Zhu, Xusen Sun, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Mofanerf: Morphable facial neural radiance field.
\newblock In {\em ECCV}, 2022.
