---
arxiv_id: "2305.03713"
title: Avatar Fingerprinting for Authorized Use of Synthetic Talking-Head Videos
authors:
  - Ekta Prashnani
  - Koki Nagano
  - Shalini De Mello
  - David Luebke
  - Orazio Gallo
submitted: "2023-05-05"
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.03713
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 7/79
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-21T00:26:54+00:00"
references_parsed: 79
arxiv_version: ""
---

We thoroughly evaluate our algorithm both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our algorithm outperforms reasonable baselines (Section <a href="#sec:baselines" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:baselines">0.1</a>), it generalizes to generators not seen in training (Section <a href="#sec:generalization" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:generalization">0.2</a>), and it is robust to video compression (Supplement). We also perform a number of ablation studies to analyze our design choices: our input features, the importance of the time-shuffling term in the loss function (Section <a href="#sec:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:ablation">0.3</a>), and the impact of clip duration (Supplement).

<figure data-latex-placement="t!">

</figure>

We begin by evaluating qualitatively our method’s ability to extract embedding vectors based on the driving identity. Figure <a href="#fig:videos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:videos">[fig:videos]</a> shows a set of self- and cross-reenacted clips (please view the animation in a media-enabled viewer, such as Adobe Acrobat). For each row, we take one identity as reference and we compute the embedding vectors of clips that use it both as the driving and the target identity. We then compute the average Euclidean distance of the resulting embedding vectors against those of _the self-reenactments by the same reference identity_. We note that the average distance $`d`$ is lower when the driving identity matches the reference identity (first two columns). We also note that the distances between the clips in the first two columns are similar: this confirms that the distance is a function of the facial motion, rather than the facial appearance. When the driving identity changes, the average distance increases, even if the target identity matches the reference identity, which is precisely our goal. More results are in the Supplement.

To evaluate our approach more formally, we use the 35 unique test-set identities that are not used as driving or target identities in the training set (Section <a href="#sec:implem" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:implem">[sec:implem]</a>). One at a time, we treat each identity ID$`_i`$ as target and synthesize cross-reenactments using all the remaining identities as drivers. This is the set of “unauthorized” synthetic videos for ID$`_i`$. The self-reenacted samples for ID$`_i`$ form the “authorized” set. Note that there are several self-reenacted videos of ID$`_i`$, one per original video of ID$`_i`$.

For each target identity ID$`_i`$, we extract the dynamic identity embedding vector of all the clips in the pool of its self- and cross-reenacted videos, and compute their Euclidean distances. That is, for clip $`k`$ we compute

```math
\begin{equation}
    \begin{split}
    &d(\clip{i}{i}^k, \clip{i}{i}^l),~~\forall l \neq k,~~\text{and}\\
    &d(\clip{i}{i}^k, \clip{j}{i}^l),~~\forall l \neq k,~~~\forall i \neq j.
    \end{split}
\end{equation}
```

We threshold these distances for each target identity to get an ROC curve, and average across the target identities to get the overall area under the curve (AUC). We note that this AUC measures one model’s ability to classify a synthetic video as self-reenactment or as cross-reenacted. We conduct further analysis of our model’s ability to classify other categories of videos—such as, evaluating AUC on same-utterance self- vs. cross-reenactments or on scripted vs. free-form monologues—in the Supplement.

<figure id="fig:auc" data-latex-placement="t!">

<figcaption>ROC curves and AUC values for our method and two baselines: Agarwal  <span class="citation" data-cites="Agarwal_2019_CVPR_Workshops"></span> and ID-Reveal <span class="citation" data-cites="Cozzolino_2021_ICCV"></span>. Each sub-plot shows the results on our test set for each of the three talking-head generators: face-vid2vid <span class="citation" data-cites="wang2021facevid2vid"></span>, LIA <span class="citation" data-cites="wang2022latent"></span>, and TPS <span class="citation" data-cites="tps2022"></span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Comparisons with Existing Methods

Avatar fingerprinting is a novel task, and no existing methods directly address it. The closest related works aim at detecting real versus synthetic media. As discussed in Section <a href="#sec:related" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:related">[sec:related]</a>, some of these detectors learn identity-specific features such as facial expressions and head poses , or facial shapes and motion  and can serve as baselines for the task of avatar fingerprinting with some adaptation. The work by Agarwal trains a model to detect synthetic videos of a _specific_ identity . To adapt it to our task, we train 35 different models, one for each identity in the evaluation, by splitting the corresponding original videos into two subsets. We then test each model on the self- and cross-reenactment videos of the corresponding identity. ID-Reveal, trained on a large-scale dataset, learns an embedding space where real videos of a specific identity are grouped together . Since it shows good generalization to new identities, for the task of synthetic media detection, we directly use the pre-trained model on our data to detect, once again, self- versus cross-reenactment. Figure <a href="#fig:auc" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:auc">1</a> shows the ROC curves for our method compared to these baselines, on three face-reenactment generators (face-vid2vid , LIA , and TPS ). Our method (AUC=0.868 on face-vid2vid) outperforms by a wide margin both ID-Reveal (AUC=0.720 on face-vid2vid), and the method by Agarwal (AUC=0.726 on face-vid2vid). We also note that, unlike ID-Reveal and our method, Agarwal uses a different model per identity.

<figure id="fig:new-generator-robust" data-latex-placement="t!">

<figcaption><strong>Generalization to new generators</strong>. To study the robustness to new talking-head generators, we train three version of our model on three different generators and test on all three.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Generalization to New Generators

For an avatar fingerprinting model algorithm to be broadly applicable, generalization to new talking-head generators that are not seen in training is crucial. Since our dataset contains videos synthesized by three different generators, we can train three models, one with each generator, and test these models on all three generators. Figure <a href="#fig:new-generator-robust" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:new-generator-robust">2</a> shows the resulting ROC curves and AUC values: the overlap of the curves and similar AUC values in each subplot confirms that our method generalizes well to new generators.

## Ablation Study

Our method outperforms existing baselines by introducing two novel components: the dynamic facial identity features, which capture the facial dynamics in a compact and expressive way, and the loss function, which defines the shape of the identity embedding. Here we study the contribution of each, using the face-vid2vid generator for training and testing. We evaluate the contribution of our dynamic facial identity features by swapping them with 3DMM features , a popular choice to capture facial dynamics. Since we use a temporal CNN backbone similar to the one from ID-Reveal, for this ablation we use the loss function proposed in their original paper . We re-train the same network using our features and observe a jump from 0.718 to 0.754 in terms of AUC. Upon inspection we notice that the 3DMM features tend to over-smooth the facial motion, and are unable to capture subtle dynamics that prove critical to avatar fingerprinting, and which our features capture. We also evaluate the contribution of our dynamic identity embedding loss and observe a further improvement (AUC 0.868). With our loss formulation, the advantage of $`\text{R}_{j,\text{ID}_1,\text{ID}_2}(t)`$ in Eq. <a href="#eq:loss" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="eq:loss">[eq:loss]</a> is also evident when compared against a model trained without this term (AUC 0.850). Table <a href="#table:feature-loss-ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:feature-loss-ablation">[table:feature-loss-ablation]</a> summarizes this ablation study. Additional experiments in the Supplement show the impact of $`F`$, performance on scripted vs. free-from monologues, and robustness to video distortions.

## References

1. Apple's vision pro. \url{https://www.apple.com/apple-vision-pro/}, accessed: 2024-03-06
2. Heygen. \url{https://www.heygen.com}, accessed: 2023-11-16
3. Microsoft teams mesh. \url{https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoft-teams/microsoft-mesh}, accessed: 2024-03-06
4. Myheritage. \url{https://www.myheritage.com}, accessed: 2023-11-16
5. Nvidia's maxine. \url{https://developer.nvidia.com/maxine}, accessed: 2024-03-06
6. Agarwal, S., El-Gaaly, T., Farid, H., Lim, S.N.: Detecting deep-fake videos from appearance and behavior. {2020 IEEE International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security (WIFS)} pp.~1--6 (2020)
7. Agarwal, S., Farid, H.: Detecting deep-fake videos from aural and oral dynamics. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops (June 2021)
8. Agarwal, S., Farid, H., Fried, O., Agrawala, M.: Detecting deep-fake videos from phoneme-viseme mismatches. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops (2020)
9. Agarwal, S., Farid, H., Gu, Y., He, M., Nagano, K., Li, H.: Protecting world leaders against deep fakes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops (2019)
10. Agarwal, S., Hu, L., Ng, E., Darrell, T., Li, H., Rohrbach, A.: Watch those words: Video falsification detection using word-conditioned facial motion. In: IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) (2023)
11. Albright, M., McCloskey, S.: Source generator attribution via inversion. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops (2019)
12. Baluja, S.: Hiding images in plain sight: Deep steganography. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2017)
13. Blanz, V., Vetter, T.: A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces. In: Proceedings of SIGGRAPH (1999)
14. Blanz, V., Vetter, T.: Face recognition based on fitting a {3D} morphable model. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (TPAMI) (2003)
15. Boháček, M., Farid, H.: Protecting world leaders against deep fakes using facial, gestural, and vocal mannerisms. Proceedings of the national academy of Sciences (2022)
16. Cao, H., Cooper, D.G., Keutmann, M.K., Gur, R.C., Nenkova, A., Verma, R.: {CREMA-D}: {C}rowd-sourced emotional multimodal actors dataset. IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing (2014)
17. Chan, E.R., Lin, C.Z., Chan, M.A., Nagano, K., Pan, B., De~Mello, S., Gallo, O., Guibas, L.J., Tremblay, J., Khamis, S., et~al.: Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 16123--16133 (2022)
18. Chung, J.S., Nagrani, A., Zisserman, A.: Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition. In: INTERSPEECH (2018)
19. Corona, E., Zanfir, A., Gabriel~Bazavan, E., Kolotouros, N., Alldieck, T., Sminchisescu, C.: Vlogger: Multimodal diffusion for embodied avatar synthesis. In: arXiv (2024)
20. Cozzolino, D., Nießner, M., Verdoliva, L.: Audio-visual person-of-interest deepfake detection (2022)
21. Cozzolino, D., Poggi, G., Verdoliva, L.: Extracting camera-based fingerprints for video forensics. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Workshops (June 2019)
22. Cozzolino, D., R\"ossler, A., Thies, J., Nie{\ss}ner, M., Verdoliva, L.: {ID-Reveal}: {I}dentity-aware {DeepFake} video detection. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2021)
23. Dolhansky, B., Bitton, J., Pflaum, B., Lu, J., Howes, R., Wang, M., Canton~Ferrer, C.: The deepfake detection challenge dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07397 (2020) [arXiv:2006.07397](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07397)
24. Dolhansky, B., Bitton, J., Pflaum, B., Lu, J., Howes, R., Wang, M., Ferrer, C.C.: The deepfake detection challenge (dfdc) dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.07397 (2020) [arXiv:2006.07397](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.07397)
25. Dong, X., Bao, J., Chen, D., Zhang, T., Zhang, W., Yu, N., Chen, D., Wen, F., Guo, B.: Protecting celebrities from deepfake with identity consistency transformer. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2022)
26. Drobyshev, N., Chelishev, J., Khakhulin, T., Ivakhnenko, A., Lempitsky, V., Zakharov, E.: {MegaPortraits}: One-shot megapixel neural head avatars (2022)
27. Fox, G., Liu, W., Kim, H., Seidel, H.P., Elgharib, M., Theobalt, C.: {Video\-Foren\-sics\-HQ}: {D}etecting high-quality manipulated face videos. In: IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (2021)
28. Fridrich, J.: Steganography in Digital Media: Principles, Algorithms, and Applications. Cambridge University Press (2009)
29. Ge, S., Lin, F., Li, C., Zhang, D., Wang, W., Zeng, D.: Deepfake video detection via predictive representation learning. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications (TOMM) (2022)
30. Hadsell, R., Chopra, S., LeCun, Y.: Dimensionality reduction by learning an invariant mapping. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2006)
31. Haliassos, A., Vougioukas, K., Petridis, S., Pantic, M.: Lips don't lie: A generalisable and robust approach to face forgery detection. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2021)
32. Haliassos, A., Vougioukas, K., Petridis, S., Pantic, M.: Lips don't lie: {A} generalisable and robust approach to face forgery detection. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2021)
33. He, Y., Gan, B., Chen, S., Zhou, Y., Yin, G., Song, L., Sheng, L., Shao, J., Liu, Z.: Forgerynet: A versatile benchmark for comprehensive forgery analysis. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 4360--4369 (2021)
34. Hill, H., Johnston, A.: Categorizing sex and identity from the biological motion of faces. Current Biology (2001)
35. Honari, S., Molchanov, P., Tyree, S., Vincent, P., Pal, C., Kautz, J.: Improving landmark localization with semi-supervised learning. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2018)
36. Hong, F.T., Zhang, L., Shen, L., Xu, D.: Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head video generation (2022)
37. Jian~Zhao, H.Z.: Thin-plate spline motion model for image animation (2022)
38. Jiang, L., Guo, Z., Wu, W., Liu, Z., Liu, Z., Loy, C.C., Yang, S., Xiong, Y., Xia, W., Chen, B., Zhuang, P., Li, S., Chen, S., Yao, T., Ding, S., Li, J., Huang, F., Cao, L., Ji, R., Lu, C., Tan, G.: {DeeperForensics Challenge 2020} on real-world face forgery detection: Methods and results. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.09471 (2021) [arXiv:2102.09471](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.09471)
39. Jiang, L., Li, R., Wu, W., Qian, C., Loy, C.C.: Deeperforensics-1.0: A large-scale dataset for real-world face forgery detection. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020)
40. Jiang, L., Li, R., Wu, W., Qian, C., Loy, C.C.: {DeeperForensics-1.0}: A large-scale dataset for real-world face forgery detection. In: CVPR (2020)
41. Karras, T., Laine, S., Aittala, M., Hellsten, J., Lehtinen, J., Aila, T.: Analyzing and improving the image quality of {StyleGAN}. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020)
42. Khakhulin, T., Sklyarova, V., Lempitsky, V., Zakharov, E.: Realistic one-shot mesh-based head avatars. In: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (2022)
43. Khosla, P., Teterwak, P., Wang, C., Sarna, A., Tian, Y., Isola, P., Maschinot, A., Liu, C., Krishnan, D.: Supervised contrastive learning. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2020)
44. Kim, H., Elgharib, M., Zollh{\"o}fer, M., Seidel, H.P., Beeler, T., Richardt, C., Theobalt, C.: Neural style-preserving visual dubbing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) (2019)
45. Kim, H., Garrido, P., Tewari, A., Xu, W., Thies, J., Niessner, M., P{\'e}rez, P., Richardt, C., Zollh{\"o}fer, M., Theobalt, C.: Deep video portraits. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) (2018)
46. Kingma, D.P., Ba, J.: Adam: {A} method for stochastic optimization. arXiv (2014)
47. Knappmeyer, B., Thornton, I., B{\"u}lthoff, H.: Facial motion can determine facial identity. Journal of Vision (2001)
48. Kovela, S., Valle, R., Dantrey, A., Catanzaro, B.: Any-to-any voice conversion with f 0 and timbre disentanglement and novel timbre conditioning. In: ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (2023)
49. Kwon, P., You, J., Nam, G., Park, S., Chae, G.: Kodf: A large-scale korean deepfake detection dataset. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 10744--10753 (2021)
50. Li, J., Xie, H., Yu, L., Zhang, Y.: Wavelet-enhanced weakly supervised local feature learning for face forgery detection. In: Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (2022)
51. Li, Y., Sun, P., Qi, H., Lyu, S.: {Celeb-DF}: {A} large-scale challenging dataset for {DeepFake} forensics. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020)
52. Liu, B., Liu, B., Ding, M., Zhu, T., Yu, X.: Ti2net: Temporal identity inconsistency network for deepfake detection. In: IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) (2023)
53. Livingstone, S.R., Russo, F.A.: The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech and song {(RAVDESS)}: {A} dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american english. PloS one (2018)
54. Luo, X., Zhan, R., Chang, H., Yang, F., Milanfar, P.: Distortion agnostic deep watermarking. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020)
55. Ma, S., Simon, T., Saragih, J., Wang, D., Li, Y., De~La~Torre, F., Sheikh, Y.: Pixel codec avatars. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2021)
56. Mallya, A., Wang, T.C., Liu, M.Y.: {Implicit Warping for Animation with Image Sets}. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2022)
57. Munir, S., Batool, B., Shafiq, Z., Srinivasan, P., Zaffar, F.: Through the looking glass: Learning to attribute synthetic text generated by language models. In: Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume (2021)
58. O'Toole, A.J., Roark, D.A., Abdi, H.: Recognizing moving faces: {A} psychological and neural synthesis. Trends in Cognitive Sciences (2002)
59. Passos, L.A., Jodas, D., da~Costa, K.A., J{\'u}nior, L.A.S., Rodrigues, D., Del~Ser, J., Camacho, D., Papa, J.P.: A review of deep learning-based approaches for deepfake content detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.06095 (2022) [arXiv:2202.06095](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.06095)
60. Petrovich, M., Litany, O., Iqbal, U., Black, M.J., Varol, G., Peng, X.B., Rempe, D.: Multi-track timeline control for text-driven 3d human motion generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08559 (2024) [arXiv:2401.08559](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.08559)
61. Remelli, E., Bagautdinov, T., Saito, S., Wu, C., Simon, T., Wei, S.E., Guo, K., Cao, Z., Prada, F., Saragih, J., et~al.: Drivable volumetric avatars using texel-aligned features. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings (2022)
62. R\"ossler, A., Cozzolino, D., Verdoliva, L., Riess, C., Thies, J., Nie{\ss}ner, M.: Face{F}orensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2019)
63. R\"ossler, A., Cozzolino, D., Verdoliva, L., Riess, C., Thies, J., Nie{\ss}ner, M.: Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision. pp. 1--11 (2019)
64. Schroff, F., Kalenichenko, D., Philbin, J.: {FaceNet}: {A} unified embedding for face recognition and clustering. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2015)
65. Siarohin, A., Lathuilière, S., Tulyakov, S., Ricci, E., Sebe, N.: First order motion model for image animation. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2019)
66. Sun, K., Yao, T., Chen, S., Ding, S., Li, J., Ji, R.: Dual contrastive learning for general face forgery detection (2022)
67. Tancik, M., Mildenhall, B., Ng, R.: Stegastamp: Invisible hyperlinks in physical photographs. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020)
68. Tian, L., Wang, Q., Zhang, B., Bo, L.: Emo: Emote portrait alive-generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17485 (2024) [arXiv:2402.17485](../2024/2402.17485.md)
69. Wang, K., Wu, Q., Song, L., Yang, Z., Wu, W., Qian, C., He, R., Qiao, Y., Loy, C.C.: Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face generation. In: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (2020)
70. Wang, T.C., Mallya, A., Liu, M.Y.: One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video conferencing. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2021)
71. Wang, X., Han, X., Huang, W., Dong, D., Scott, M.R.: Multi-similarity loss with general pair weighting for deep metric learning. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2019)
72. Wang, Y., Yang, D., Bremond, F., Dantcheva, A.: Latent image animator: Learning to animate images via latent space navigation. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2022)
73. Yacoob, Y.: Gan-scanner: A detector for faces of stylegan+ (2021), \url{https://github.com/yaseryacoob/GAN-Scanner}
74. Yu, N., Skripniuk, V., Abdelnabi, S., Fritz, M.: Artificial fingerprinting for generative models: Rooting deepfake attribution in training data. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2021)
75. Yu, N., Skripniuk, V., Chen, D., Davis, L., Fritz, M.: Responsible disclosure of generative models using scalable fingerprinting. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2022)
76. Yuan, Y., Li, X., Huang, Y., De~Mello, S., Nagano, K., Kautz, J., Iqbal, U.: Gavatar: Animatable 3d gaussian avatars with implicit mesh learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11461 (2023) [arXiv:2312.11461](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.11461)
77. Zakharov, E., Ivakhnenko, A., Shysheya, A., Lempitsky, V.: Fast bi-layer neural synthesis of one-shot realistic head avatars. In: European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) (2020)
78. Zakharov, E., Shysheya, A., Burkov, E., Lempitsky, V.: Few-shot adversarial learning of realistic neural talking head models. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2019)
79. Zheng, Y., Bao, J., Chen, D., Zeng, M., Wen, F.: Exploring temporal coherence for more general video face forgery detection. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2021)
