---
arxiv_id: '2306.10813'
title: 'Instruct-NeuralTalker: Editing Audio-Driven Talking Radiance Fields with Instructions'
authors:
- Yuqi Sun
- Ruian He
- Weimin Tan
- Bo Yan
submitted: '2023-06-19'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.AI
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.10813
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 2/41
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-05T11:22:50+00:00'
references_parsed: 41
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

<figure id="intro-1" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/intro-0.pdf" />
<figcaption><em>Audio-Driven Original Portrait Synthesis</em> shows the generated results of the original radiance field driven by the input audio. By giving editing instructions like <em>"Make him look like an old man"</em> and <em>"Turn him into Edward Munch painting"</em>, our methods can synthesize high-quality talking faces that meet the editing target well while maintaining audio-lip synchronization.</figcaption>
</figure>

Audio-driven talking face generation has been a long-standing task in computer vision and graphics, with widespread applications in digital humans, VR/AR, 3D telepresence, and virtual video conferencing. Recent methods have made significant progress in achieving photorealistic and controllable talking face generation based on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) . By constructing an implicit 3D face model, their approaches allow impressive editing capabilities such as novel view synthesis and background replacement. However, achieving advanced editing tasks like semantic manipulation and style transfer on implicit representations remains challenging.

Some methods introduce image stylization methods into NeRFs editing. They usually take a reference image as condition to stylize the global scene appearance of the 3D content. ClipNeRF and NeRF-Art extend image conditions to text prompt by leveraging pre-trained visual language models like CLIP . More recently, Instruct-NeRF2NeRF (in2n) achieves impressive instruction-based editing by incorporating a diffusion model InstructPix2Pix (ip2p) . Nevertheless, all these methods focus on static scenes and have not been fully explored in dynamic scenarios. In this work, we propose the first interactive framework, Instruct-NeuralTalker, for semantically editing dynamic Talking Radiance Fields (TRFs) with human instructions, which enables highly personalized talking face generation.

<figure id="detail generation" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/control.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption>Visual results for instruction <em>"Make him look like Van Gogh"</em>. By manipulating the added weight of the refinement network’s output, we can generate controllable details, where lower weight values yield smooth results, and higher weight produces rich details. Our method also supports other editing tasks like novel view synthesis and background replacement.</figcaption>
</figure>

Given a short speech video, our approach first builds an initial TRF for the original sequence. Then users can provide text instructions specifying personalized editing goals, such as *"Make him look like an old man"* or *"Turn him into Edward Munch painting"*. Once the desired appearance is defined, we progressively modify the training dataset using ip2p during the optimization to guide the initial TRF toward the edited target. Ultimately, we obtain a TRF with an "old man" or "Edward Munch painting" style that can generate corresponding talking faces driven by audio. Leveraging the latest efficient NeRF architecture, our method achieves real-time rendering on consumer hardware up to 30FPS. We showcase some visual results in Figure <a href="#intro-1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="intro-1">1</a>.

In contrast to editing static scenes, it is essential to consider motion consistency in editing dynamic radiance fields. For talking faces generation, it involves ensuring audio-lip synchronization in the edited results. Applying ip2p to update datasets like in2n may lead to noticeable changes in lip shape, which we attribute to the large text guidance scale and steps of the reverse diffusion process in ip2p. To address this, we propose a progressive dataset updating strategy that gradually increases the text guidance scale and diffusion steps during the optimization. This approach helps the model preserve lip shape in a coarse-to-fine manner. We also estimate the lip parsing mask and calculate a lip-edge loss to restrain the edges of the lips for audio-lip synchronization.

On the other hand, since the editing results of ip2p do not guarantee cross-view consistency, the edited TRF tends to produce over-smoothed results. To solve this, we introduce a refinement network for complementing image details. We weighted add the rendered result from the edited TRF and the result of the refinement network to produce the final output. It also enables us to generate controllable detail by adjusting the refinement weight. Our method supports 3D editing tasks like novel view synthesis and background replacement. Figure <a href="#detail generation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="detail generation">2</a> illustrates the results. We also implement an interactive interface facilitating users to perform instruction editing. We highly recommend watching the video in the supplementary material for a better experience.

In summary, this paper has the following contributions:

$`\bullet`$ We propose Instruct-NeuralTalker, the first interactive framework to semantically edit the audio-driven talking radiance fields with simple human instructions. It enables real-time rendering on consumer hardware.

$`\bullet`$ In order to ensure audio-lip synchronization, we develop a progressive dataset updating strategy to prevent distortion of lip shape during the optimization process.

$`\bullet`$ We introduce a lightweight refinement network to complement high-frequency image details and achieve controllable detail generation in the rendering process.

$`\bullet`$ Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method in video quality compared to the state-of-the-art.

# Related work

***Audio-Driven Taking Face Generation.*** Audio-driven talking face generation aims to reenact a specific person’s speaking video based on audio input. Traditional methods introduce an explicit 3D representation to achieve controllable face generation, such as 3D morphable face models and facial landmarks . In addition, some methods focus on generating talking faces from a single image. However, the explicit representation may lead to error accumulation and mismatches between audio and lips. With the development of NeRF, recent methods propose to model talking faces as a dynamic talking radiance field for reducing information loss. AD-NeRF was the first to directly map audio features to dynamic NeRFs for lips movement generation, achieving better audio-visual consistency. DFRF can adapt to new identities with limited reference images through pretraining on a large dataset. DFA-NeRF decouples lip movement features related to audio from personalized attributes unrelated to audio using a self-supervised learning approach. RAD-NeRF leverages recent successful grid-based NeRF approaches to model dynamic head movements using efficient audio and spatial grids, which achieves real-time talking face generation.

<figure id="method" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/method.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Overview of our pipeline.</strong> Given a text instruction such as "Make him look like a cartoon character," we use InstructPix2Pix (ip2p) to edit the rendered frames from initial TRF <span class="math inline"><strong>R</strong><sub><strong>o</strong></sub></span> to get cartoon-style images, which are used to build the edited TRF <span class="math inline"><strong>R</strong><sub><strong>e</strong></sub></span>. Our progressive dataset update strategy keeps increasing the text guidance <span class="math inline"><strong>s</strong></span> and diffusion steps <span class="math inline"><strong>t</strong></span> in ip2p to control the degree of editing. A refinement network is proposed for compensating high-frequency image details. The final image <span class="math inline"><em>I</em><sub><em>f</em></sub></span> is obtained by weighted-add the output of our refinement network and rendered image <span class="math inline"><em>I</em><sub><em>r</em></sub></span> from <span class="math inline"><strong>R</strong><sub><strong>e</strong></sub></span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

***Instruction-based Neural Editing.*** The rise of large-scale language models LLMs (such as ChatGPT) has enabled complex task control through natural language, particularly instructions. InstructPix2Pix demonstrates remarkable results in instruction-based editing for 2D image tasks, leveraging the GPT and stable diffusion . Building upon this progress, Instruct-Nerf2NeRF (in2n) introduces ip2p to 3D scene editing and allows for intuitive editing for the first time, showcasing the potential of instruction-based control in NeRF editing. Nevertheless, they focus on editing static scenes. Inspired by in2n, our method first introduces instruction-based editing into dynamic NeRFs to achieve a personalized generation of talking faces. It gives rise to an interface entirely controlled by language, facilitating a more comprehensive range of intuitive 3D talking face editing.

# Method

We present Instruct-NeuralTalker, a novel interactive framework for editing dynamic talking radiance fields (TRFs). Our approach takes as input a short talking video along with its corresponding source data, such as face-parsing masks and head poses obtained through face parsing and tracking. Following recent implicit talking face modeling methods, we first build an initial TRF $`\mathbf{R_o}`$. Additionally, given an editing instruction, e.g., *"Make him look like a cartoon character"*, we use ip2p to iteratively edit the audio-driven rendered result from $`\mathbf{R_o}`$ and use it as training data in turn to optimize the talking radiance field. In the end, we can obtain an edited TRF $`\mathbf{R_e}`$ that can generate audio-lip-synchronized talking faces that conform to the editing instructions.

## Preliminaries

*RAD-NeRF.* We employ RAD-NeRF as the backbone network for building TRFs. It directly maps audio features to dynamic neural radiance fields representing the talking face. RAD-NeRF achieves real-time rendering by incorporating the latest advancements in the grid-based NeRF architecture, which stores explicit 3D features in efficient data structures such as multi-resolution hash tables and low-rank tensor components for efficient computation. To be specific, RAD-NeRF encodes a 3D coordinate into spatial feature $`\textbf{f}`$ with a 3D feature grid encoder along with a spatial-dependent audio vector $`\textbf{a}`$, an eye feature $`e`$ and appearance embedding $`i`$. The plenoptic function is modeled by $`\mathcal{F} : \textbf{c}, \sigma = \Theta(\textbf{f}, \textbf{a}, e, i)`$, where $`\textbf{c}`$ is the emitted color, $`\sigma`$ is the volume density and $`\Theta`$ is the weight of a small MLP. The final color of the pixel is obtained by volume rendering:

``` math
\begin{equation}
    \textbf{C}(\textbf{r}) = \displaystyle \sum_{i}T_i \alpha_i \textbf{c}_i, T_i = \prod_{j<i}(1 - \alpha_j)
    \label{volume rendering}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\alpha_i = 1 - exp(-\sigma_i \delta_i)`$ is the opacity, $`T_i`$ is the transmittance, and $`\delta_i = t_{i+1} - t_i`$ is the step size between two 3D coordiantes.

*InstructPix2Pix.* InstructPix2Pix (ip2p) aims to achieve instruction-based image editing using the diffusion model, which learns to gradually denoise pure Gaussian noise into data samples. Given an original image x, a text instruction $`c_T`$, and an image conditioning $`c_I`$, ip2p learn a network $`\epsilon_\theta`$ that predicts the noise added to the noisy latent $`z_t`$. The network is optimized by the following loss function:

``` math
\begin{equation}
    L = \mathbb{E}_{\xi(x), \xi(c_I), c_T, \epsilon \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 1), t} [ \lvert\lvert \epsilon - \epsilon_\theta(z_t, t, \xi(c_I), c_T) \rvert\rvert^2_2 ]
    \label{diffusion}
\end{equation}
```

where $`t \in (0,T)`$ means denoising level. Since there exist two conditions $`c_T`$ and $`c_I`$, ip2p use two classifier-free guidance scales , $`s_T`$ and $`s_I`$, which can be adjusted to trade off how strongly the generated samples correspond with the edit instruction and how strongly they correspond with the input image.

<figure id="pdu" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/pdu_3.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Results of different dataset update strategies with instruction "Turn him into a Modigliani painting". We show the results after 45k iterations. "Iterative dataset update" leads to little difference with original data, and "One time dataset update" destroys lip shape. Our method performs effective editing in a coarse-to-fine manner while maintaining the correct lip shape.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Instruct-NeuralTalker

Our method aims to edit the talking radiance field based on text instructions. Figure <a href="#method" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="method">3</a> illustrates our pipeline. Given audio and an initial TRF $`\mathbf{R_o}`$, we rendered $`N`$ frames $`{\{I_i\}^N_{i=1}}`$ from TRF driven by input audio as a training dataset. We then use ip2p to edit each frame in the dataset to get $`{\{I_i^e\}^N_{i=1}}`$ based on text instructions. Since ip2p may destroy the lip shape, we introduce a progressive dataset update strategy to update the training set iteratively. After that, we take the new dataset to build the edited TRF $`\mathbf{R_e}`$, where we obtain the rendered result through volume rendering. Since the results are over-smoothed, we introduce a refinement network to enhance image details and achieve controllable detail generation. In addition, we incorporate a lip-edge loss to control lip shape further and maintain audio-lip synchronization.

## Progressive Dataset Update

In2n proposes an iterative dataset updating strategy that takes the original image as an extra condition to slowly edit training data (one image at a time). Although it works well on static scenes, it often fails when editing talking faces such that the edited image makes little difference from the original image. We attribute it to the extra image conditions in the diffusion model and the sparse views in the talking face. It is useful when we remove the extra image condition and perform one time dataset update, but a fixed large text guidance scale $`s_T`$ and diffusion step $`t`$ may destroy lip shape, as shown in the left of Figure <a href="#pdu" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="pdu">4</a>. To solve this problem, we propose a progressive dataset update (PDU) strategy that uses a small increasing text guidance scale and diffusion step to update the dataset several times. In this way, PDU achieves a coarse-to-fine editing effect, which helps maintain audio-lip synchronization, shown in the right of Figure <a href="#pdu" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="pdu">4</a>.

To be specific, we fix the image guidance scale $`s_I`$, and only change the text guidance scale $`s_T`$ (denote as $`s`$) and diffusion step $`t`$. At first, we set a lower and upper bound $`[s_l, s_u]`$, $`[t_l, t_u]`$ for $`s`$ and $`t`$, respectively. We then determine text guidance scale $`s_i`$ and diffusion step $`t_i`$ for each dataset update by uniformly sampling:

``` math
\begin{equation}
    s_i = s_l + \frac{i - 1}{K - 1} (s_u - s_l), t_i = t_l + \lfloor \frac{i - 1}{K - 1} (t_u - t_l) \rfloor
    \label{equ.sample}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\lfloor \cdot \rfloor`$ means rounding down, $`i \in [1, K]`$ and $`K`$ denotes how many times to update the training dataset $`{\{I_i\}^N_{i=1}}`$. We initialize $`s_l, t_l`$ with a small value and edit each frame in training dataset to obtain an edited dataset $`{\{I^e_i\}^N_{i=1}}`$, which we use as supervision in the optimization for building the edited talking radiance field $`\mathbf{R_e}`$ later. After that, we stop the optimization and re-render $`N`$ frames $`{\{I^{'}_{i=1}\}_i^N}`$ from $`\mathbf{R_e}`$. We then send them into ip2p for the second update with $`s_2`$ and $`t_2`$. After $`K`$ times dataset updates and optimizations, we obtain the final talking radiance field that satisfies the instruction. Figure <a href="#pdu" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="pdu">4</a> illustrates an example when $`K = 3`$.

<figure id="result" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/result_5.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative results of our method. Given a simple text instruction, our method is able to edit the original sequence into a high-quality talking face that matches the editing target and maintains excellent audio-lip synchronization. </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="comparison" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/compare_1.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparisons with the state-of-the-art methods. Wav2Lip only generates static heads. The lip shapes of MakeitTalk and SadTalker are far from that of the origin sequence. The two post-processing based methods ip2p, ip2p+deflicker suffer from significant flicker and distortion. Our method was able to generate the best results.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Refinement Network

We render images $`I_r`$ from $`\mathbf{R_e}`$ by volume rendering, described in equation <a href="#volume rendering" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="volume rendering">[volume rendering]</a>. Although the edited talking radiance field can render satisfactory results with great temporal consistency, the images appear overly smooth and lack fine details. We attribute this to the inconsistent cross-view editing results by ip2p and the network capacity of MLP, which limits its ability to learn high-frequency signals. Recently, some methods incorporate convolution networks in neural rendering to improve image quality. Inspired by this idea, we separate the rendering result into low-frequency and high-frequency signals and model them using NeRF $`\mathtt{\mathcal{F(\cdot)}}`$ and a convolution-based refinement network $`\mathtt{g(\cdot)}`$, respectively. The optimization objective can be written as:

``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathop{\arg\min}\limits_{\mathtt{\mathcal{F}}, \mathtt{g}} = \mathcal{L}_{low}(\mathtt{V(\mathcal{F})} ) + \mathcal{L}_{high}( \mathtt{g(V(\mathcal{F}))})
    \label{equ.fre}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathtt{V}`$ denotes the volume rendering equation, $`\mathcal{L}_{low}`$ and $`\mathcal{L}_{high}`$ are the losses we modeled for low-frequency and high-frequency information.

Specifically, we implement a refinement network with a residual dense block consisting of multi-level residual networks and dense skip connections. The multiple connections layers help the network capture the high-frequency details. To ensure a lightweight implementation, the refinement network utilizes only a single block as the backbone network, resulting in a compact size of just 1MB. More details are represented in the supplementary material. We send the result rendered from the talking radiance field $`I_r`$ into the refinement network and add the output to $`I_r`$ with the following equation:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    I_f = \omega \mathtt{g}(I_r) + (1 - \omega) I_r
    \label{equ.3}
\end{equation}
```
This allows us to achieve controllable detail generation by choosing different weights $`\omega`$. We show the result in Figure <a href="#detail generation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="detail generation">2</a>. In addition, since the refinement network is lightweight, we can perform real-time rendering on consumer hardware.

## Losses

Given an edited image $`I^e`$ as supervision, we apply different losses for the rendered result $`I_r`$ from the talking radiance field and the final result $`I_f`$. As described in the refinement network, we expect NeRF to model low-frequency information. Therefore, $`\mathcal{L}_{low}`$ consists of a reconstruction and lip-edge loss for $`I_r`$. For $`I_f`$, since we hope it can learn high-frequency details, we adapt $`\mathcal{L}_{high}`$ losses at the feature level, including perceptual loss, style loss, and adversarial loss.

***Lip-Edge Loss.*** We introduce constraints on the lip edges to further control the edited talking radiance field to generate the correct lip shape. For this sake, we borrow the depth smooth loss used in depth estimation and apply it to the lip constraint. We first parse the original face to extract the lip mask $`M^{lip}`$, and then constrain the edges $`I_r^{lip}`$ inside the lip patch of $`I_r`$ to be consistent with the correct edges in $`I^{lip}`$, with the following equation:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{lip} = \lvert \nabla I_r^{lip} * M^{lip} \rvert \cdot exp(\text{-} \lvert \nabla I^{lip} \cdot M^{lip} \rvert)
    \label{equ.4}
\end{equation}
```
$`\lvert \cdot \rvert`$ and $`\nabla`$ means absolute value and differential operator.

***Reconstruction Loss.*** We calculate a MSE loss between the result $`I_r`$ and the edited image $`I^e`$ as the reconstruction loss:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{rec} = \lvert \lvert I_r - I^e \lvert \lvert_2^2
    \label{equ.6}
\end{equation}
```

***Perceptual and Style Loss.*** Perceptual loss calculates the feature distance between the input image and the target image in a pre-trained VGG network . Style loss adds a Gram matrix in perceptual loss to penalize differences in style like color, texture. The formula is as follows:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
        &\mathcal{L}_{pcp} = \sum_l \lambda_l \Vert \Phi_l(I_f) - \Phi_l(I^e) \Vert_1  \\
        &\mathcal{L}_{style} = \sum_l \lambda_l \Vert gram(\Phi_l(I_f)) - gram(\Phi_l(I^e)) \Vert_1
    \end{aligned}
    \label{equ.7}
\end{equation}
```
$`\Phi_l`$ denotes the outputs of middle layers of a pretrained VGG network, and the weights $`\lambda_l`$ determine which layers of the network are used. $`gram(\cdot)`$ is a matrix of inner products of a set of vectors in an inner product space.

***Adversarial Loss.*** We also use adversarial loss to increase image detail. The adversarial loss $`\mathcal{L}_{adv}`$ is calculated on the final result $`I_f`$ and the edited image $`I^e`$ through a learnable discriminator, which aims to distinguish the training data distribution and predicts one.

We first train the network using all losses other than lip-edge loss, the total loss is calculated by:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{total} = \lambda_{rec} \mathcal{L}_{rec} + \lambda_{pcp} \mathcal{L}_{pcp} + \lambda_{style} \mathcal{L}_{style} + \lambda_{adv} \mathcal{L}_{adv}
    \label{equ.8}
\end{equation}
```
After that, we finetune our method by adding lip-edge loss.

``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{ft} = \mathcal{L}_{total} + \lambda_{lip} \mathcal{L}_{lip} 
    \label{equ.9}
\end{equation}
```
We set $`\lambda_{rec}=1,  \lambda_{pcp}=0.001, \lambda_{style}=10, \lambda_{adv}=0.01, \lambda_{lip}=0.1`$.

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;">Methods</th>
<th style="text-align: center;">Type</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↑</span> Sync</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Score</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↑</span> CLIP</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Direction</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↓</span> ArcFace</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↓</span> Ew</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Temporal</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Consistency</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Pose</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Manipulation</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">NVS /</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Background</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Details</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Control</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Wav2Lip</td>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">One-shot</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Generation</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>8.82</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0477</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.54</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">-</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">MakeitTalk</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.48</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0518</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.36</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0053</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">SadTalker</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.36</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0442</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.86</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>0.0045</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Ip2p</td>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align: center;"><table>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Instruction-based</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Neural Editing</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>0.0597</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.81</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0120</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Ip2p + deflicker</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.61</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0435</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0054</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">×</span></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span>1-1</span> Ours</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>6.66</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.0642</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>1.99</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.0044</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<div class="tabular">

l\|c\|c\|c\|c

\*Methods & Lip & Instruction & Face & Overall\
& Sync. & Editing Quality & Identity Preserving & Video Quality\

Wav2Lip & 1.75% & 1.75% & 0.75% & 1.25%\
MakeitTalk & 1% & 2.75% & 1.0% & 1.25%\
SadTalker & <u>13.5%</u> & <u>17%</u> & <u>16.75%</u> & <u>27%</u>\
ip2p & 5% & 4.75%& 6.25% & 2.0%\
ip2p+deflicker & 8% & 4.0%& 8.5% & 4.75%\
Ours & **70.75%** & **69.75%** & **66.75%** & **63.75%**\

</div>

# Experiments

##  Implementation Details and Metrics

*Datasets.* We borrow the Obama video from and videos from HDTF for our experiments. Each video has a duration of approximately 5 minutes. We take 1200 frames for initializing the talking radiance fields.

*Implementation Details.* Since our method introduces convolution-based refinement work, the random ray sampling strategy is unsuitable. Instead, we apply a patch-based ray sampling to facilitate spatial dependencies between rays. We randomly crop a $`256\times256`$ patch from the edited images as supervision. When fine-tuning our method with lig-edge loss, we only use a $`64 \times 64`$ patch of lip regions for training. Since the talking radiance field has already been initialized, we only need a few images to participate in the optimization during editing, further speeding up the model training. Typically, we set the number of images participating in training N to 200 and the dataset updating times $`\mathbf{K} = 3`$. We first train 300 epochs on a large patch and then finetune another 100 on a lip patch. We take Adam as the optimizer, and the learning rate is set as 5e-4 for MLP and 2e-4 for our refinement network, which takes roughly an hour on a single NVIDIA RTX 3090. More details are provided in the supplementary material.

*Evaluation Metrics.* We evaluate our method for editing equality on four main aspects. To assess the audio-lip synchronization, we follow previous works and employ the identity-agnostic SyncNet confidence (**Sync score** ). We evaluate the instruction editing quality with the directional similarity in CLIP space (**CLIP Direction** ). Additionally, we employ a face identity distance loss (**ArcFace** ) to measure face identity preserving. For temporal inconsistency, we apply a warping error ($`\textbf{E}_\textbf{w}`$ ) that considers both short-term and long-term warping errors. Please see the supplementary material for details.

## Comparisons

*Comparison settings.* Since there is no method to consider instruction-based talking face editing, we compare our method with two-stage methods, which consist of two main categories: (1) editing an image first using ip2p and then applying it to one-shot talking face generation methods (Wav2Lip, MakeitTalk, SadTalker) (2) using RAD-NeRF to render the target image first, and then post-process it using ip2p. We also use the latest deflickering method to post-process the second type of method (ip2p+deflicker).

<div id="ablation_idu">

<table>
<caption>Results and training time of three different dataset updating strategies.</caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: center;">Methods</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="ablation_idu">
<table>
<caption>Results and training time of three different dataset updating strategies.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span class="math inline">↑</span> Sync</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Score</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="ablation_idu">
<table>
<caption>Results and training time of three different dataset updating strategies.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↑</span> CLIP</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Direction</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↓</span> Ew</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="ablation_idu">
<table>
<caption>Results and training time of three different dataset updating strategies.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Training</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Time</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Iterative dataset update</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>6.73</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0175</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>0.0048</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5 h</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">One time dataset update</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.36</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.0699</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0054</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1 h</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Progressive dataset update</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>6.66</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>0.0642</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.0044</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">1 h</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<div id="ablation_table">

<table>
<caption>Ablation study for our method with and without progressive dataset update (PDU) and refinement network.</caption>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Methods</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="ablation_table">
<table>
<caption>Ablation study for our method with and without progressive dataset update (PDU) and refinement network.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span class="math inline">↑</span> Sync</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Score</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><div id="ablation_table">
<table>
<caption>Ablation study for our method with and without progressive dataset update (PDU) and refinement network.</caption>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↑</span> CLIP</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: center;">Direction</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
</div></th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↓</span> ArcFace</th>
<th style="text-align: center;"><span class="math inline">↓</span> Ew</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Base</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.54</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0430</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.62</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0051</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Base + PDU</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.33</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0458</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.03</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.0043</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Base + PDU + RefineNet(<span class="math inline"><em>ω</em></span>=0.4)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>6.30</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>0.0569</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><u>2.01</u></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.0044</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">Base + PDU + RefineNet(<span class="math inline"><em>ω</em></span>=0.8)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>6.66</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.0642</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>1.99</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.0044</strong></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

*Qualitative results.* We first illustrate some results of our method, as shown in Figure <a href="#result" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result">10</a>. Figure <a href="#comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="comparison">6</a> shows two editing results for comparisons. Wav2Lip can only produce a static head result. MakeitTalk generates a lip shape that differs significantly from the original result. SadTalker, the current SOTA one-shot-based talking face generation method, can produce high-quality results but does not match the original lip shape well. The post-processing-based network can restore a more consistent lip shape but suffers from flicker and distortion, while our method produces the best editing results. We highly recommend watching the video for a better visual experience.

*Quantitative Results.* We show quantitative results in Table <a href="#comp_table" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="comp_table">[comp_table]</a>. Wav2Lip only focuses on generating lip movements and achieving the highest audio-lip synchronization. We disregard evaluating its video consistency as it only generates static heads. MakeitTalk performs poorly in audio-lip consistency, and SadTalker can generate high-quality talking faces but fails to preserve the original identity and guarantee instruction editing direction. The method utilizing ip2p for post-processing exhibits poor temporal consistency. After deflickering, there is some improvement in generated quality, but it compromises the original identity and editing direction. Our method achieves top rankings in all four metrics, either first or second. In addition to instruction-based editing, our method supports a wide range of editing tasks, such as pose manipulation, novel view synthesis, background replacement, and controllable details generation. Visual results are shown in Figure <a href="#detail generation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="detail generation">2</a>.

*User Studies.* We conduct user studies to evaluate the quality of generated talking faces. We generate 20 videos from different characters and text instructions. We invite 20 participants and let them choose the best method for lip synchronization, instruction editing quality, face identity preserving, and overall video quality. We show the result in Table <a href="#user_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="user_study">[user_study]</a>, where the participants prefer our method mostly in all four evaluation terms. We attribute this to the superiority of our method in both audio-lip consistency and video quality.

<figure id="ablation" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/ablation.pdf" />
<figcaption>Illustration of ablation study with instruction <em>"Make him look like an Edward Munch painting"</em>.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Ablation study

We first validate our method by comparing it to different dataset updating strategies. Figure <a href="#pdu" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="pdu">4</a> and Table <a href="#ablation_idu" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ablation_idu">4</a> show the qualitative and quantitative results. Iterative dataset update is very slow and not able to guarantee successful editing, shown in the little difference between the original image and low **CLIP Direction** value. Although one time dataset update speeds up training time, we find that it destroys the lip shape, shown in the low **Sync Score** value. Our progressive dataset update achieves successful editing while maintaining high audio-lip synchronization.

We then evaluate each component in our method. We take one time dataset update as a baseline and add the progressive dataset update strategy (PDU) and refinement network to it step by step. We show the quantitative results in Table <a href="#ablation_table" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ablation_table">7</a>. PDU brings a significant improvement in audio-lip synchronization. We also find that increasing the refinement weight is helpful to a higher CLIP Direction value as it enriches the image details. Figure <a href="#ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ablation">7</a> show some visual results. Our baseline method destroys the lip’s shape. By adding PDU, the lip structure matches the original image well. By adding refinement networks and controlling the weights, we can adjust the details of the final results. We also conduct experiments on the efficiency of rendering. The rendering speed is approximately 30 FPS when the refinement network is off and 25 FPS when the refinement network is enabled.

# Conclusion

We present Instruct-NeuralTalker, the first interactive framework to edit talking radiance fields with instructions. Instruct-NeuralTalker greatly expands the ability to edit 3D talking faces. It enables users to generate personalized talking faces with their instructions. In order to keep the audio-lip synchronization, we introduce a progressive dataset update strategy to keep the lip shape. We also introduce a refinement network to overcome over-smoothed results and support controllable detail generation. In addition, our approach achieves real-time rendering on consumer hardware.

<div class="appendix">

# More Visualization

We implement an interactive interface for user to perform instruction-based editing, shown in Figure <a href="#interface" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="interface">9</a>. Our method achieves six functions : instruction-based editing, novel view synthesis, background replacement, controllable detail generation, audio-driven talking face synthesis and real-time rendering. More visual results are represented in Figure <a href="#result" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="result">10</a>. For a better visual experience, we highly recommend watching the video demo in the supplementary files.

# Refinement Network

We draw inspiration from the residual dense block (RRDB) in the super-resolution method ESRGAN to implement our refinement network. A single RRDB block consists of five convolutional layers, each following a leaky relu activation function. A skip connection exists between every two convolutional layers. To keep the implementation lightweight, we use only one RRDB module, with a model size of only 1MB, which allows us to achieve real-time rendering on consumer-grade hardware. We sum the results of the refinement network and the direct rendering of the talking radiance field according to the weights $`\omega`$ so that it allows for controlled detail generation. We set the $`\omega = 0.8`$ during the optimization.

# Implementation Details and Metrics

*Data pre-processing.* We borrowed the Obama video from and nine other videos from HDTF for the experiment. The duration of each video is 5 minutes. We first extract face landmarks and parse masks by landmark detection and face parsing. Then, we use the landmarks to optimize the 3D MM model to obtain the head pose, expression vectors, and so on. For audio processing, an Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) model is applied to extract audio features from the audio track.

*Evaluation Metrics.* We evaluate our method for editing equality on four main aspects. We take a closer look at CLIP Direction and $`E_w`$ in the following:

$`\bullet`$ CLIP Direction. We evaluate the instruction editing quality with the directional similarity in CLIP space (CLIP Direction ). We manually provide pre- and post-editing image captions corresponding to the editing instructions. For example, we provide "A photograph of a man" and "A photograph of a young man" for the instruction "Make him look like a young man".

<figure id="badcase" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/bad_case.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Bad cases of our method. The left column is the original image, and the right colume is the edited result by ip2p. Ip2p struggles with adding and removing objects. Fine-tuning ip2p in a instruction-based face editing dataset may sovle this problem.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="interface" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/interface.pdf" />
<figcaption>User interface. We implement an interactive interface for user to perform instruction-base editing. </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="result" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="imgs/result_3.pdf" />
<figcaption>Visual results of our method.</figcaption>
</figure>

$`\bullet`$ $`E_w`$. For temporal inconsistency, we apply a warping error ($`E_w`$ ) that considers both short-term and long-term warping errors. Given a pair of frames $`O_t`$ and $`O_s`$, the warping error $`E_{pair}`$ can be calculated by:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \begin{aligned}
        & E_{pair}(O_t, O_s) = \lvert \lvert M_{t,s} \odot (O_t - \hat{O_s}) \lvert \lvert_1 \\
        & E_{warp}^t = E_{pair}(O_t, O_{t-1}) + E_{pair}(O_t,O_1)
    \end{aligned}
    \label{equ.7}
\end{equation}
```
where $`\hat{O_s}`$ is obtained by warping the $`O_s`$ with the optical flow from frame $`t`$ to frame $`s`$. $`M_{t,s}`$ is the occlusion mask from frame $`t`$ and frame $`s`$. For each frame $`t`$, the warping error $`E_{warp}^t`$ is computed with the previous and first frames in the video. We use PWC-Net to calculate the optical flow between two frames.

*Implementation Details.* Our progressive dataset update strategy fix the image gudiance scale $`s_I=1.5`$, and determine text guidance scale $`s`$ and diffusion step by uniformly sampling from a lower and upper bound $`[s_l, s_u]`$, $`[t_l, t_u]`$. For most of the editing results in the paper, we set the $`s_l = 3.0, s_u = 6.0`$, $`t_l = 10, t_u = 20`$ and the dataset updating time $`K=3`$. For some other cases, we manually make adjustments to ensure the image quality of the editing result. In practice, the optimal choice for this bound is a subjective decision — a user may prefer more subtle or more extreme edits that are best found at different stages of training.

# Limitations.

Our method inherits many of the limitations of InstructPix2Pix. For example, it struggles with counting numbers of objects and with spatial reasoning and does not support adding or removing large objects. We show some base cases in Figure <a href="#badcase" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="badcase">8</a>. Our method’s editing capability is primarily limited by ip2p. As ip2p has not been specifically optimized for facial data, it has limited ability to edit faces, which has no face structure prior and may leads to some wrong edits. Therefore, exploring instruction-based editing on facial images would be an interesting direction for future research. Additionally, our method requires optimization to perform edits and cannot be rapidly extended to arbitrary instructions. Exploring optimization-free 3D facial editing methods is our future network.

</div>

## References

1. Baevski, A.; Zhou, H.; rahman Mohamed, A.; and Auli, M. 2020.
\newblock wav2vec 2.0: A Framework for Self-Supervised Learning of Speech
  Representations.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2006.11477.
2. Brooks, T.; Holynski, A.; and Efros, A.~A. 2022.
\newblock InstructPix2Pix: Learning to Follow Image Editing Instructions.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2211.09800.
3. Brown, T.~B.; Mann, B.; Ryder, N.; Subbiah, M.; Kaplan, J.; Dhariwal, P.;
  Neelakantan, A.; Shyam, P.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.; Agarwal, S.;
  Herbert-Voss, A.; Krueger, G.; Henighan, T.~J.; Child, R.; Ramesh, A.;
  Ziegler, D.~M.; Wu, J.; Winter, C.; Hesse, C.; Chen, M.; Sigler, E.; Litwin,
  M.; Gray, S.; Chess, B.; Clark, J.; Berner, C.; McCandlish, S.; Radford, A.;
  Sutskever, I.; and Amodei, D. 2020.
\newblock Language Models are Few-Shot Learners.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2005.14165.
4. Chan, E.; Lin, C.~Z.; Chan, M.; Nagano, K.; Pan, B.; Mello, S.~D.; Gallo, O.;
  Guibas, L.~J.; Tremblay, J.; Khamis, S.; Karras, T.; and Wetzstein, G. 2021.
\newblock Efficient Geometry-aware 3D Generative Adversarial Networks.
\newblock \emph{2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}, 16102--16112.
5. Chen, A.; Xu, Z.; Geiger, A.; Yu, J.; and Su, H. 2022.
\newblock TensoRF: Tensorial Radiance Fields.
\newblock In \emph{European Conference on Computer Vision}.
6. Chen, Q.; and Koltun, V. 2017.
\newblock Photographic Image Synthesis with Cascaded Refinement Networks.
\newblock \emph{2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)},
  1520--1529.
7. Chung, J.~S.; and Zisserman, A. 2017.
\newblock \emph{Out of Time: Automated Lip Sync in the Wild}, 251–263.
8. Deng, J.; Guo, J.; and Zafeiriou, S. 2018.
\newblock ArcFace: Additive Angular Margin Loss for Deep Face Recognition.
\newblock \emph{2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}, 4685--4694.
9. Gal, R.; Patashnik, O.; Maron, H.; Chechik, G.; and Cohen-Or, D. 2021.
\newblock StyleGAN-NADA: CLIP-Guided Domain Adaptation of Image Generators.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2108.00946.
10. Gatys, L.~A.; Ecker, A.~S.; and Bethge, M. 2015.
\newblock Texture Synthesis Using Convolutional Neural Networks.
\newblock In \emph{NIPS}.
11. Guo, Y.; Chen, K.; Liang, S.; Liu, Y.; Bao, H.; and Zhang, J. 2021.
\newblock AD-NeRF: Audio Driven Neural Radiance Fields for Talking Head
  Synthesis.
\newblock \emph{2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
  (ICCV)}, 5764--5774.
12. Haque, A.; Tancik, M.; Efros, A.~A.; Holynski, A.; and Kanazawa, A. 2023.
\newblock Instruct-NeRF2NeRF: Editing 3D Scenes with Instructions.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2303.12789.
13. Ho, J. 2022.
\newblock Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2207.12598.
14. Huang, Y.; He, Y.; Yuan, Y.-J.; Lai, Y.-K.; and Gao, L. 2022.
\newblock StylizedNeRF: Consistent 3D Scene Stylization as Stylized NeRF via
  2D-3D Mutual Learning.
\newblock \emph{2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}, 18321--18331.
15. Johnson, J.; Alahi, A.; and Fei-Fei, L. 2016.
\newblock Perceptual Losses for Real-Time Style Transfer and Super-Resolution.
\newblock In \emph{European Conference on Computer Vision}.
16. Lei, C.; Ren, X.; Zhang, Z.; and Chen, Q. 2023.
\newblock Blind Video Deflickering by Neural Filtering with a Flawed Atlas.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}.
17. Mildenhall, B.; Srinivasan, P.~P.; Tancik, M.; Barron, J.~T.; Ramamoorthi, R.;
  and Ng, R. 2020.
\newblock NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View
  Synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV)}.
18. Mirza, M.; and Osindero, S. 2014.
\newblock Conditional Generative Adversarial Nets.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/1411.1784.
19. Müller, T.; Evans, A.; Schied, C.; and Keller, A. 2022.
\newblock Instant Neural Graphics Primitives with a Multiresolution Hash
  Encoding.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 1–15.
20. Nguyen-Phuoc, T.; Liu, F.; and Xiao, L. 2022.
\newblock SNeRF: Stylized Neural Implicit Representations for 3D Scenes.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2207.02363.
21. Ouyang, L.; Wu, J.; Jiang, X.; Almeida, D.; Wainwright, C.~L.; Mishkin, P.;
  Zhang, C.; Agarwal, S.; Slama, K.; Ray, A.; Schulman, J.; Hilton, J.; Kelton,
  F.; Miller, L.~E.; Simens, M.; Askell, A.; Welinder, P.; Christiano, P.~F.;
  Leike, J.; and Lowe, R.~J. 2022.
\newblock Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2203.02155.
22. Prajwal, K.~R.; Mukhopadhyay, R.; Namboodiri, V.~P.; and Jawahar, C. 2020.
\newblock A Lip Sync Expert Is All You Need for Speech to Lip Generation In the
  Wild.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, MM '20, 484–492. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing
  Machinery.
\newblock ISBN 9781450379885.
23. Pumarola, A.; Corona, E.; Pons-Moll, G.; and Moreno-Noguer, F. 2021.
\newblock D-NeRF: Neural Radiance Fields for Dynamic Scenes.
\newblock In \emph{2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}.
24. Radford, A.; Kim, J.~W.; Hallacy, C.; Ramesh, A.; Goh, G.; Agarwal, S.; Sastry,
  G.; Askell, A.; Mishkin, P.; Clark, J.; Krueger, G.; and Sutskever, I. 2021.
\newblock Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language
  Supervision.
\newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning}.
25. Rombach, R.; Blattmann, A.; Lorenz, D.; Esser, P.; and Ommer, B. 2021.
\newblock High-Resolution Image Synthesis with Latent Diffusion Models.
\newblock arXiv:2112.10752. [arXiv:2112.10752](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10752)
26. Shen, S.; Li, W.; Zhu, Z.; Duan, Y.; Zhou, J.; and Lu, J. 2022.
\newblock Learning Dynamic Facial Radiance Fields for Few-Shot Talking Head
  Synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{European Conference on Computer Vision}.
27. Simonyan, K.; and Zisserman, A. 2014.
\newblock Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition.
\newblock \emph{CoRR}, abs/1409.1556.
28. Sun, D.; Yang, X.; Liu, M.-Y.; and Kautz, J. 2017.
\newblock PWC-Net: CNNs for Optical Flow Using Pyramid, Warping, and Cost
  Volume.
\newblock \emph{2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition}, 8934--8943.
29. Suwajanakorn, S.; Seitz, S.~M.; and Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, I. 2017.
\newblock Synthesizing Obama.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 36: 1 -- 13.
30. Tang, J.; Wang, K.; Zhou, H.; Chen, X.; He, D.; Hu, T.; Liu, J.; Zeng, G.; and
  Wang, J. 2022.
\newblock Real-time Neural Radiance Talking Portrait Synthesis via
  Audio-spatial Decomposition.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2211.12368.
31. Thies, J.; Elgharib, M.; Tewari, A.; Theobalt, C.; and Nießner, M. 2020.
\newblock \emph{Neural Voice Puppetry: Audio-driven Facial Reenactment},
  716–731.
32. Wang, C.; Chai, M.; He, M.; Chen, D.; and Liao, J. 2021.
\newblock CLIP-NeRF: Text-and-Image Driven Manipulation of Neural Radiance
  Fields.
\newblock \emph{2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}, 3825--3834.
33. Wang, C.; Jiang, R.; Chai, M.; He, M.; Chen, D.; and Liao, J. 2022.
\newblock NeRF-Art: Text-Driven Neural Radiance Fields Stylization.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2212.08070.
34. Wang, X.; Yu, K.; Wu, S.; Gu, J.; Liu, Y.; Dong, C.; Loy, C.~C.; Qiao, Y.; and
  Tang, X. 2018.
\newblock ESRGAN: Enhanced Super-Resolution Generative Adversarial Networks.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/1809.00219.
35. Yao, S.; Zhong, R.; Yan, Y.; Zhai, G.; and Yang, X. 2022.
\newblock DFA-NeRF: Personalized Talking Head Generation via Disentangled Face
  Attributes Neural Rendering.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2201.00791.
36. Yin, Z.; and Shi, J. 2018.
\newblock GeoNet: Unsupervised Learning of Dense Depth, Optical Flow and Camera
  Pose.
\newblock \emph{2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition}, 1983--1992.
37. Zakharov, E.; Shysheya, A.; Burkov, E.; and Lempitsky, V. 2019.
\newblock Few-Shot Adversarial Learning of Realistic Neural Talking Head
  Models.
38. Zhang, K.; Kolkin, N.~I.; Bi, S.; Luan, F.; Xu, Z.; Shechtman, E.; and Snavely,
  N. 2022{\natexlab{a}}.
\newblock ARF: Artistic Radiance Fields.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2206.06360.
39. Zhang, W.; Cun, X.; Wang, X.; Zhang, Y.; Shen, X.; Guo, Y.; Shan, Y.; and Wang,
  F. 2022{\natexlab{b}}.
\newblock SadTalker: Learning Realistic 3D Motion Coefficients for Stylized
  Audio-Driven Single Image Talking Face Animation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12194}. [arXiv:2211.12194](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12194)
40. Zhang, Z.; Li, L.; and Ding, Y. 2021.
\newblock Flow-guided One-shot Talking Face Generation with a High-resolution
  Audio-visual Dataset.
\newblock \emph{2021 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
  Recognition (CVPR)}, 3660--3669.
41. Zhou, Y.; Li, D.; Han, X.; Kalogerakis, E.; Shechtman, E.; and Echevarria,
  J.~I. 2020.
\newblock MakeItTalk: Speaker-Aware Talking Head Animation.
\newblock \emph{ArXiv}, abs/2004.12992.
