---
arxiv_id: '2306.07579'
title: Parametric Implicit Face Representation for Audio-Driven Facial Reenactment
authors:
- Ricong Huang
- Peiwen Lai
- Yipeng Qin
- Guanbin Li
submitted: '2023-06-13'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.07579
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 8/45
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:23:10+00:00'
references_parsed: 45
arxiv_version: ''
---

<div class="table*">

<div class="tabular">

lccccc\|cc\|cc \*Method & & &\
(r)2-6(r)7-8(r)9-10 & SSIM$`\uparrow`$ & PSNR$`\uparrow`$ & CPBD$`\uparrow`$ & LMD$`\downarrow`$ & AVConf$`\uparrow`$ & LMD$`\downarrow`$ & AVConf$`\uparrow`$ & LMD$`\downarrow`$ & AVConf$`\uparrow`$\
Ground Truth & 1 & N/A & 0.344 & 0 & 8.839 & 0 & 8.407 & 0 & 9.315\
ATVG & <u>0.829</u> & 20.540 & 0.078 & 9.645 & 4.848 & 8.784 & 5.232 & 10.445 & 4.903\
Wav2Lip & 0.729 & 20.352 & **0.317** & <u>4.279</u> & **7.812** & 4.836 & **7.554** & 4.297 & **7.682**\
MakeitTalk & 0.698 & 19.956 & 0.075 & 4.940 & 3.972 & 4.939 & 4.172 & 5.064 & 3.467\
PC-AVS & 0.738 & <u>21.078</u> & 0.096 & 5.199 & <u>7.392</u> & 6.678 & <u>6.742</u> & 4.091 & 6.858\
AD-NeRF & - & - & - & - & - & <u>4.691</u> & 4.236 & - & -\
FACIAL & - & - & - & - & - & - & - & <u>2.675</u> & 6.045\
Ours & **0.970** & **36.711** & <u>0.305</u> & **1.794** & 7.233 & **2.116** & 6.133 & **1.899** & <u>7.655</u>\

</div>

</div>

# Experiments

## Experimental Settings

To achieve high-quality audio-driven facial reenactment, we follow and conduct experiments on three datasets, the HDTF , Testset 1 , Testset 2 . For HDTF, we selected 8 videos (corresponding to 8 subjects) from it. For Testset 1 and 2, we use the sole video released by the authors for each of them. The time span of these videos is 3-6 minutes. For the test set consisting of unpaired and gender-balanced audio clips, we select 3 from HDTF and collect another 2 Obama audios online. Please note that many previous datasets (, LRW , Voxceleb1 and Voxceleb2 ) are not suitable as they either have low image quality or consist of many short (a few seconds) video clips of different speakers (, GRID and MEAD ), which hinders the generation of high-quality videos and the capture of long-term audio context.

Before use, all videos are extracted at 25 frames per second (FPS) and the synchronized audio waves are sampled as $`16K`$ Hz frequency. We crop the videos to center the faces and resize them to the resolution of $`512 \times 512`$. For each video, we extract the identity, expression and pose parameters of each frame using 3DMM . We obtain the (mean) identity parameters of a target person by averaging those of the same person over all frames in a video. The estimated head poses are represented as camera poses. An off-the-shelf segmentation method is used to obtain the parsing map (, head mask) of each frame.

To facilitate an objective evaluation of lip movement accuracy and image quality, we first evaluate our method under self-reenactment setting on all three datasets, with the last 25s of each original video clip being used as the ground truth test data. To evaluate the performance of our method across identities (where there are no ground truths), we pair the videos in Testset 1 and 2 with audios of different identities for reenactment and use SyncNet  to assess the quality of synchronization.

## Implementation details

We implement our framework in PyTorch with an Adam optimizer . We train our contextual audio to expression component for 120 epochs with the expression parameters extracted by 3DMM, a context length of $`k=100`$ (each frame lasts for 0.04s), and pretrained wav2vec 2.0 weights. Thanks to its well-defined output, we train our audio to expression component simultaneously with the other two components. Our implicit representation paramerterization component is trained for 50 epochs using the expression parameters extracted by 3DMM as input and the rendered face $`I_{face}`$ as output. The resolution of the resulting parametric implicit representation $`I_F`$ is $`32\times 64 \times 64`$. The three tri-plane features have the resolution of $`32\times 256 \times 256`$ and that of output image $`I_{face}`$ is $`3\times 512\times 512`$. Our rendering with parametric implicit representation component is trained for another 50 epochs with $`s=3`$ for jitter reduction and the augmented $`I_F`$ whose resolution is $`32\times 32 \times 32`$. We use $`w_1=w_2=w_3=w_4=1`$ for <a href="#equ:L_face,equ:L_render_rec" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="equ:L_face,equ:L_render_rec">[equ:L_face,equ:L_render_rec]</a>.

## Comparison with the State-of-the-arts 

### Quantitative Evaluation

We quantitatively compare our method with SOTAs using the following metrics:

- We use the Landmark Distance (LMD) to evaluate lip movement accuracy.

- We measure lip synchronization errors with the Audio-Visual Confidence (AVConf) score calculated by SyncNet .

- We measure frame sharpness with the perceptual-based no-reference objective image sharpness metric (CPBD) .

- We assess the quality of synthesized video frames by comparing them with the ground truth using Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Structure Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) .

<figure id="fig:qualitative" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/qualitative.pdf" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparison with ATVG <span class="citation" data-cites="chen2019hierarchical"></span>, Wav2Lip <span class="citation" data-cites="prajwal2020lip"></span>, MakeitTalk <span class="citation" data-cites="zhou2020makelttalk"></span> and PC-AVS <span class="citation" data-cites="zhou2021pose"></span>. Row 1 (Ground Truth): the corresponding video frames to the input audio. Last two rows (Ours): rendered face <span class="math inline"><em>I</em><sub><em>f</em><em>a</em><em>c</em><em>e</em></sub></span> and output image <span class="math inline"><em>I</em></span> (<a href="#fig:framework" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:framework">[fig:framework]</a>), respectively. The portraits generated by our method have highly synchronized lip movements and fine facial details (, teeth and wrinkles) that preserve the target person’s identity well, thus outperforming all previous methods. </figcaption>
</figure>

As <a href="#tab:quantitative" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:quantitative">[tab:quantitative]</a> shows, our method achieves the best or second-best performance for most of the evaluation metrics. For the exceptions, Wav2Lip achieves a higher CPBD score on HDTF but sacrifices the visual quality (blurry mouths with obvious artifacts in <a href="#fig:qualitative" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative">1</a>) as it only edits the mouth region of the reference images with the remaining part unchanged. In addition, it is trained using a pretrained lip-sync discriminator similar to SyncNet, which “tricks” SyncNet to produce the highest AVConf scores on all three datasets. PC-AVS gets slightly higher AVConf scores than our method on HDTF and Testset 1, but are much worse than ours on all the other metrics, especially LMD. This indicates that PC-AVS learns natural-looking lip movements but fails to capture individual speaking styles. In contrast, our method is more personalized as it takes into account the identity parameters $`z_{id}`$ and thus excels in the more fine-grained LDM.

### Qualitative Comparison

We compare our methods with state-of-the-art 2D-based methods, including the explicit ATVG and MakeitTalk , and implicit Wav2Lip and PC-AVS , in <a href="#fig:qualitative" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative">1</a>. For 3D-based methods, we compare ours with the explicit FACIAL and implicit AD-NeRF in <a href="#fig:3dmethod" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:3dmethod">2</a>.

As <a href="#fig:qualitative" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative">1</a> shows, our method produces the highest quality results with the most synchronized lip-movement. Specifically, i) ATVG and MakeitTalk fail to produce accurate lip movements as they rely on less expressive 2D facial landmarks; ii) Wav2Lip produces blurry mouths that do not match the sharp parts in the rest of the video frames, making the results unnatural; iii) although PC-AVS produces head movements that are consistent with the ground truth, it cannot well preserve the identity of the speaker. In addition, none of these methods can synthesize high-resolution videos. In contrast, our method allows for the synthesis of high-resolution, high-quality videos with highly synchronized lip movements that preserve facial details well (, teeth and wrinkles), which are crucial for identity preservation and the naturalness of facial reenactment.

<div id="tab:diversity">

| Method             | AVConf$`\uparrow`$ | Method  | AVConf$`\uparrow`$ |
|:-------------------|-------------------:|:--------|-------------------:|
| 1-2(r)3-4 AD-NeRF  |              3.607 | FACIAL  |              4.623 |
| Ours               |          **6.758** | Ours    |          **6.678** |

Quantitative comparisons of our method with AD-NeRF and FACIAL .

</div>

As <a href="#fig:3dmethod" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:3dmethod">2</a> shows, our method is also superior to AD-NeRF and FACIAL. Specifically, i) AD-NeRF suffers from the artifacts at the head-neck junction which stem from a mismatch between the two NeRFs it uses to model the head and torso separately; ii) FACIAL produces less accurate lip movements due to the less expressive 3D face shape it uses as the intermediate face representation. Please refer to <a href="#tab:diversity" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:diversity">1</a> for a quantitative comparison w.r.t lip movement accuracy between AD-NeRF, FACIAL and our method.

**Remark.** For the comparison with AD-NeRF and FACIAL (<a href="#fig:3dmethod" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:3dmethod">2</a>), we use the codes and pretrained models released by the authors and compare the generalizability by feeding all models with 5 unpaired and gender-balanced audio clips mentioned above. The reference images are the corresponding frames of the input audio clips in the new videos.

<figure id="fig:3dmethod" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/3dmethod_small.pdf" />
<figcaption>Comparison with AD-NeRF <span class="citation" data-cites="guo2021ad"></span> and FACIAL <span class="citation" data-cites="zhang2021facial"></span>. </figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:abl_first_branch" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/ablation_firstbranch.pdf" />
<figcaption>Ablation study of our rendering with PIR component. Row 2: the images generated without this component.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:abl_intrinsic" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/ablation_intrinsic.pdf" />
<figcaption>Ablation study of our jitter reduction technique.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Ablation Study

As <a href="#fig:abl_first_branch" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:abl_first_branch">3</a> shows, without our rendering with PIR component (, use the implicit representation parameterization component to generate the output image $`I`$ directly, not just the head), the torso changes rapidly within seconds and produces unnatural results. This justifies the necessity of our Rendering with PIR component.

As <a href="#fig:abl_intrinsic" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:abl_intrinsic">4</a> shows, without jitter reduction, the rendering component cannot align $`I_F`$ with $`I_M`$, thus producing unnatural videos. This justifies the necessity of our jitter reduction technique.

<div id="tab:user_study">

| Method      | Lip-sync |  Image   |  Video   |     |
|:------------|:--------:|:--------:|:--------:|:---:|
| ATVG        |   2.87   |   1.87   |   1.76   |     |
| Wav2Lip     |   3.91   |   2.67   |   2.76   |     |
| MakeitTalk  |   2.69   |   2.73   |   2.84   |     |
| PC-AVS      |   3.89   |   3.16   |   3.38   |     |
| AD-NeRF     |   3.84   |   3.96   |   3.73   |     |
| FACIAL      |   4.16   |   4.09   |   4.11   |     |
| Ours        | **4.31** | **4.20** | **4.29** |     |

User study on lip-sync (audio-lip synchronization), image quality and video realness.

</div>

## User Study

We invite 15 volunteers to participate in our user study to evaluate facial reenactment results based on three criteria: lip-sync (audio-lip synchronization), image quality and video realness. We create 3 videos for each method with the same audio input and ask the volunteers to give their ratings on a scale of 1 (worst) to 5 (best) for each video. As <a href="#tab:user_study" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:user_study">2</a> shows, our method scores the highest in all three criteria.

## References

1. Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli.
\newblock wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech
  representations.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  33:12449--12460, 2020.
2. Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter.
\newblock A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques}, pages 187--194, 1999.
3. Eric~R Chan, Connor~Z Lin, Matthew~A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini
  De~Mello, Orazio Gallo, Leonidas~J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis,
  et~al.
\newblock Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 16123--16133, 2022.
4. Lele Chen, Zhiheng Li, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Lip movements generation at a glance.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision
  (ECCV)}, pages 520--535, 2018.
5. Lele Chen, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic
  pixel-wise loss.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 7832--7841, 2019.
6. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}, 2018. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
7. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lip reading in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Asian conference on computer vision}, pages 87--103.
  Springer, 2016.
8. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Asian conference on computer vision}, pages 251--263.
  Springer, 2016.
9. Martin Cooke, Jon Barker, Stuart Cunningham, and Xu Shao.
\newblock An audio-visual corpus for speech perception and automatic speech
  recognition.
\newblock {\em The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America},
  120(5):2421--2424, 2006.
10. Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong.
\newblock Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From
  single image to image set.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops}, pages 0--0, 2019.
11. Yingruo Fan, Zhaojiang Lin, Jun Saito, Wenping Wang, and Taku Komura.
\newblock Faceformer: Speech-driven 3d facial animation with transformers.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 18770--18780, 2022.
12. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 5784--5794, 2021.
13. Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei.
\newblock Perceptual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
\newblock In {\em European conference on computer vision}, pages 694--711.
  Springer, 2016.
14. Diederik~P Kingma and Jimmy Ba.
\newblock Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980}, 2014. [arXiv:1412.6980](https://arxiv.org/abs/1412.6980)
15. Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael~J Black, Hao Li, and Javier Romero.
\newblock Learning a model of facial shape and expression from 4d scans.
\newblock {\em ACM Trans. Graph.}, 36(6):194--1, 2017.
16. Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu
  Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual
  control.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 3387--3396, 2022.
17. Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne Wu, and Bolei Zhou.
\newblock Semantic-aware implicit neural audio-driven video portrait
  generation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.07786}, 2022. [arXiv:2201.07786](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.07786)
18. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-head
  animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 40(6):1--17, 2021.
19. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T Barron, Ravi
  Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
  synthesis.
\newblock {\em Communications of the ACM}, 65(1):99--106, 2021.
20. Arsha Nagrani, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb: a large-scale speaker identification dataset.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.08612}, 2017. [arXiv:1706.08612](https://arxiv.org/abs/1706.08612)
21. Niranjan~D Narvekar and Lina~J Karam.
\newblock A no-reference image blur metric based on the cumulative probability
  of blur detection (cpbd).
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Image Processing}, 20(9):2678--2683, 2011.
22. Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
  Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et~al.
\newblock Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 32, 2019.
23. Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami Romdhani, and Thomas Vetter.
\newblock A 3d face model for pose and illumination invariant face recognition.
\newblock In {\em 2009 sixth IEEE international conference on advanced video
  and signal based surveillance}, pages 296--301. Ieee, 2009.
24. KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
25. Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Yueqi Duan, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for few-shot talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.11770}, 2022. [arXiv:2207.11770](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.11770)
26. Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Very deep convolutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.1556}, 2014. [arXiv:1409.1556](https://arxiv.org/abs/1409.1556)
27. Linsen Song, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Everybody’s talkin’: Let me talk as you want.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security},
  17:585--598, 2022.
28. Yasheng Sun, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Hideki Koike.
\newblock Speech2talking-face: Inferring and driving a face with synchronized
  audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em IJCAI}, volume~2, page~4, 2021.
29. Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven~M Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
\newblock Synthesizing obama: learning lip sync from audio.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 36(4):1--13, 2017.
30. Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock In {\em European conference on computer vision}, pages 716--731.
  Springer, 2020.
31. Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Linsen Song, Zhuoqian Yang, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran
  He, Yu Qiao, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face
  generation.
\newblock In {\em European Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 700--717.
  Springer, 2020.
32. Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan
  Catanzaro.
\newblock High-resolution image synthesis and semantic manipulation with
  conditional gans.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 8798--8807, 2018.
33. Zhou Wang, Alan~C Bovik, Hamid~R Sheikh, and Eero~P Simoncelli.
\newblock Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural
  similarity.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on image processing}, 13(4):600--612, 2004.
34. Tianyi Xie, Liucheng Liao, Cheng Bi, Benlai Tang, Xiang Yin, Jianfei Yang,
  Mingjie Wang, Jiali Yao, Yang Zhang, and Zejun Ma.
\newblock Towards realistic visual dubbing with heterogeneous sources.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 1739--1747, 2021.
35. Wenqi Yang, Guanying Chen, Chaofeng Chen, Zhenfang Chen, and Kwan-Yee~K. Wong.
\newblock Ps-nerf: Neural inverse rendering for multi-view photometric stereo.
\newblock In {\em European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)}, 2022.
36. Zipeng Ye, Mengfei Xia, Ran Yi, Juyong Zhang, Yu-Kun Lai, Xuwei Huang, Guoxin
  Zhang, and Yong-jin Liu.
\newblock Audio-driven talking face video generation with dynamic convolution
  kernels.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, 2022.
37. Ran Yi, Zipeng Ye, Juyong Zhang, Hujun Bao, and Yong-Jin Liu.
\newblock Audio-driven talking face video generation with learning-based
  personalized head pose.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10137}, 2020. [arXiv:2002.10137](../2020/2002.10137.md)
38. Changqian Yu, Jingbo Wang, Chao Peng, Changxin Gao, Gang Yu, and Nong Sang.
\newblock Bisenet: Bilateral segmentation network for real-time semantic
  segmentation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
  (ECCV)}, pages 325--341, 2018.
39. Jiahui Yu, Zhe Lin, Jimei Yang, Xiaohui Shen, Xin Lu, and Thomas~S Huang.
\newblock Free-form image inpainting with gated convolution.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision}, pages 4471--4480, 2019.
40. Chenxu Zhang, Yifan Zhao, Yifei Huang, Ming Zeng, Saifeng Ni, Madhukar
  Budagavi, and Xiaohu Guo.
\newblock Facial: Synthesizing dynamic talking face with implicit attribute
  learning.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision}, pages 3867--3876, 2021.
41. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution
  audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 3661--3670, 2021.
42. Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang Wang.
\newblock Talking face generation by adversarially disentangled audio-visual
  representation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial
  intelligence}, volume~33, pages 9299--9306, 2019.
43. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei
  Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized
  audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 4176--4186, 2021.
44. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis,
  and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 39(6):1--15, 2020.
45. Zanwei Zhou, Zi Wang, Shunyu Yao, Yichao Yan, Chen Yang, Guangtao Zhai, Junchi
  Yan, and Xiaokang Yang.
\newblock Dialoguenerf: Towards realistic avatar face-to-face conversation
  video generation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.07931}, 2022. [arXiv:2203.07931](../2022/2203.07931.md)
