---
arxiv_id: '2308.09716'
title: 'Diff2Lip: Audio Conditioned Diffusion Models for Lip-Synchronization'
authors:
- Soumik Mukhopadhyay
- Saksham Suri
- Ravi Teja Gadde
- Abhinav Shrivastava
submitted: '2023-08-18'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.AI
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.09716
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 13/59
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:22:36+00:00'
references_parsed: 59
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Experiments

**Datasets.** We evaluate our method on the Voxceleb2  and LRW  datasets, which contain in-the-wild videos of talking human faces and are commonly used for lip-sync research.

  - consists of over 1M face-cropped Youtube videos coming from 6000+ identities. This dataset consists of high variation in lighting, image quality, pose, and motion blur. The average video length is  8 seconds.

  - is a lip-reading dataset that contains 1000 videos each of 500 different words for a length of 1 second coming from BBC news. It has less variation compared to Voxceleb2 and focuses on clean front-facing videos. Like previous works, our model is trained only on the Voxceleb2 train split while we test on both datasets. We don’t use the whole dataset for training but rather only use the first utterance of every video, which totals 145K videos.

**Implementation Details.** We preprocess the videos to have a framerate of 25 fps and an audio sample rate of 16kHz. For all our models the video resolution is 224$`\times`$<!-- -->224 out of which we crop the face and resize it to 128$`\times`$<!-- -->128. This is then masked in the lower half using gaussian noise and fed to our model which only morphs the lower half of this image according to the audio input. Then we resize it back to the original crop size and place it back on the video. For audio inputs, we first sample the audio at 16kHz and then create mel-spectrograms with window-size 800 and hop-size 200. These audio frames turn out to have size 16$`\times`$<!-- -->80. We build our code on top of the guided-diffusion repository . We train our model on 8 NVIDIA RTXA6000 GPUs which takes around 4 days. Our model is trained using $`T=1000`$ diffusion steps, but for faster inference, we use only 25 steps of DDIM  sampling which takes 4.67 seconds on an average for all the frames of one VoxCeleb2  video (avg. 8 seconds at 25 fps) on 8 NVIDIA RTXA6000 GPUs.

<div class="table*">

<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th style="text-align: left;">Dataset</th>
<th style="text-align: left;">Method</th>
<th colspan="6" style="text-align: center;">Reconstruction</th>
<th colspan="4" style="text-align: center;">Cross</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"><span>3-8</span> (l)<span>9-12</span></td>
<td style="text-align: left;"></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">FID ↓</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">SSIM ↑</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">PSNR ↑</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">LMD ↓</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sync<span class="math inline"><sub>c</sub></span> ↑</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sync<span class="math inline"><sub>d</sub></span> ↓</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">FID ↓</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">LMD ↓</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sync<span class="math inline"><sub>c</sub></span> ↑</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">Sync<span class="math inline"><sub>d</sub></span> ↓</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align: left;">VoxCeleb2</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Wav2Lip <span class="citation" data-cites="wav2lip"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.26</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.53</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">18.18</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>9.08</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.93</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.11</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.84</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>8.12</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.74</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">PC-AVS <span class="citation" data-cites="pcavs"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.25</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.53</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>18.26</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.16</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.71</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">10.62</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.00</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.96</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.53</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"> (Ours)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.46</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.53</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">18.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.04</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8.78</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>5.93</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.53</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>4.82</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.62</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>6.73</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td rowspan="3" style="text-align: left;">LRW</td>
<td style="text-align: left;">Wav2Lip <span class="citation" data-cites="wav2lip"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.23</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>0.68</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>20.76</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.15</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>8.13</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>6.09</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">5.19</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>3.88</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>7.52</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>6.56</strong></td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;">PC-AVS <span class="citation" data-cites="pcavs"></span></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.80</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.61</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">20.10</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.29</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.68</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.29</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">8.48</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">4.09</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.66</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.27</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td style="text-align: left;"> (Ours)</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.62</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">0.67</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">20.62</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">2.17</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">7.41</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.21</td>
<td style="text-align: center;"><strong>2.54</strong></td>
<td style="text-align: center;">3.93</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.44</td>
<td style="text-align: center;">6.97</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

**Comparison Methods.** We compare our method against the most popular methods for lip-sync. Our choice of models is based also on models/codebases which are publicly available. Wav2Lip  is an inpainting style method that uses SyncNet expert loss to get good lip-sync. PC-AVS  is a head reconstruction method that focuses on controlling pose apart from identity and lip shape. For both these methods we use their publicly available pre-trained models for the evaluation of all the datasets.

<div class="minipage">

</div>

<figure id="fig:qualitative-recon" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="figures/qualitative-reconv2.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative results of Reconstruction on VoxCeleb2 <span class="citation" data-cites="voxceleb2"></span></strong>. Here we provide only the first frame as the input source (for pose) as well as the reference frame (for identity), and this frame is driven using the audio (second row) coming from the same video (top row). Wav2Lip <span class="citation" data-cites="wav2lip"></span> blurs the lip region in both cases to achieve the correct lip shape while PC-AVS has identity loss (see right) and border discontinuity. Our generations look highly realistic and have the lip shapes as in the audio source. (Please zoom in for better visibility.)</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:qualitative-cross" data-latex-placement="!h">
<embed src="figures/qualitative-crossv2.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative results of Cross generation on VoxCeleb2 <span class="citation" data-cites="voxceleb2"></span></strong>. Here we provide a video source (first row) and drive that identity-pose combination using audio coming from a different video (second and third rows). Wav2Lip <span class="citation" data-cites="wav2lip"></span> blurs its generations, for example, beard region details are missing on the right. PC-AVS’s <span class="citation" data-cites="pcavs"></span> generations have flaws like identity loss, in both cases. They introduce artifacts near the eyes on the left while there is identity loss on the right. Our method generates realistic mouths with expressive lips while being in sync with the audio source. In the bottom 2 rows, we can see that the lip region of our generations match those of the audio source. (Please zoom in for better visibility.)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Quantitative Evaluation

For quantitative evaluation, we evaluate our model in terms of both the visual quality as well as audio synchronization. For visual quality, we use FID , SSIM , and PSNR, which are popular metrics used in papers like Wav2Lip , PC-AVS , AV-CAT . FID is a popular metric used for comparing the “realness” of generated images by comparing against the real image distribution. SSIM and PSNR are pixel-wise image similarity metrics that compare a pair of images and are not suited for capturing variability in video generation  but are included in this work for completeness. While to measure synchronization we use LMD , $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$, and $`\text{Sync}_\text{d}`$ . LMD measures the distance between mouth landmarks among frames. $`\text{Sync}_{c}`$ is the confidence score of SyncNet while $`\text{Sync}_\text{d}`$ is the average distance between SyncNet video and audio representations, which tell the synchronization quality. Note that for evaluation, we use the pre-trained SyncNet from the SyncNet’s  repository but for training, we train our own SyncNet, similar to Wav2Lip and AV-CAT. We use pre-trained models of Wav2Lip and PC-AVS methods to conduct our evaluations. Wav2Lip has provided its code for calculating FID and $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$ and we use the same for these metrics. We use face-alignment   for landmark detection and the LMD metric proposed in . For SSIM and PSNR we use the same inputs as used for FID, consequently, our values are a bit different compared to . This is possibly because they evaluate these metrics at different scales and lack these evaluation details. On the other hand, we tend to get better LMD and $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$ values for PC-AVS than noted in their paper. Some papers like  show PC-AVS’s metrics only for reference as its generations occasionally fail in landmark detection. For uniformity of scale, we uncropped PC-AVS’s generations and paste them back on the background before evaluation.

<figure id="fig:qualitative-zoomed" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="figures/qualitative-zoomed-y.pdf" style="width:95.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative Visual-quality Comparison</strong>. We zoom in on the mouth region of two examples and compare them against the video source. Wav2Lip <span class="citation" data-cites="wav2lip"></span> blurs the lip region while PC-AVS <span class="citation" data-cites="pcavs"></span> tends to change the identity.   preserves identity and generates high-fidelity lips.</figcaption>
</figure>

### Reconstruction

Similar to the setting mentioned in  and later used in  and , we evaluate the methods on the task of reconstruction of the video given only the first frame and the audio corresponding to the same video. The audio is used as the driver for this reconstruction. Note that PCAVS requires an additional pose input apart from the identity input. We feed the first frame to it for both inputs, similar to the “fixed pose” setting in their paper. For Wav2lip and ours, the first frame acts as both the input frame and the reference frame. For Voxceleb2, we show the results on 4911 test utterances instead of 35K videos due to resource constraints. These 4911 utterances are the first utterance of each video in the test set, and hence cover all the videos in the test set. For LRW, our results are noted on all 25K videos in the test set.

The results are noted in Table <a href="#tab:main_table" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:main_table">[tab:main_table]</a>. We observe that  outperforms both the methods with respect to FID metric on both datasets which points towards better generation quality. The SSIM, PSNR and LMD values of our method are comparable with the other methods. We see that Wav2Lip’s $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$ is better than both ours and PC-AVS’s. This is possibly because our SyncNet expert may be weaker in performance compared to the one used in Wav2Lip.

### Cross generation

We also evaluate the method on the task of lip-sync when the identity and the pose are controlled using a video while the lip-sync is driven using input audio corresponding to a different video. This was introduced in  and is a more realistic setting as here the generations are closer to lip-sync in-the-wild. We use the input frame as the reference frame in this setting similar to Wav2Lip, as that provides the best texture information of the frame. For PC-AVS, the input frames are fed as both pose and identity sources. Note that we cannot evaluate SSIM and PSNR for this setting because there are no ground truth frames available. So, we provide the rest of the metrics in Table <a href="#tab:main_table" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:main_table">[tab:main_table]</a>. For Voxceleb2, we select 4970 pairs of audio-video combinations where the two sources are different. We sample these using all the pair combinations of the first utterance of the first video coming from 71 randomly chosen test identities. For LRW, we use the 28K audio-video pair provided in Wav2Lip’s  evaluation. The results are noted in Table <a href="#tab:main_table" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:main_table">[tab:main_table]</a>. Similar to reconstruction evaluation, we here as well observe that our method excels in image quality while being comparable in other metrics except for $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$.

## Qualitative Evaluation

For qualitative evaluation, we show visually compare against on both reconstructions (in Fig. <a href="#fig:qualitative-recon" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:qualitative-recon">1</a>) as well as cross generation (in Fig. <a href="#fig:qualitative-cross" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:qualitative-cross">2</a>). These settings are the same as introduced in Section <a href="#sec:recon" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:recon">1.1.1</a> and <a href="#sec:cross" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:cross">1.1.2</a>. It can be observed in these qualitative results that PC-AVS tends to lose the identity of the source video and also suffers from boundary discontinuity problems which make it unsuitable for in-the-wild generation. On the other hand, Wav2Lip tends to generate blurred-out mouth regions so as to achieve good lip sync.   does not suffer from these issues and is able to generate high-quality mouth region while having expressive lip shapes which correctly correspond to the ground truth (audio sources’ mouth shape) as seen in Fig. <a href="#fig:qualitative-zoomed" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:qualitative-zoomed">3</a>.

<div id="tab:user_study">

| Measure                  | Wav2Lip | PC-AVS |            |
|:-------------------------|:-------:|:------:|:----------:|
| MOS (Visual quality) ↑   |  3.75   |  2.71  |  **4.16**  |
| MOS (Lip-sync quality) ↑ |  3.84   |  3.34  |  **3.86**  |
| MOS (Overall quality) ↑  |  3.70   |  2.91  |  **3.91**  |
| Preference ↑             |   37%   | 8.33%  | **54.67**% |

User Study measured by Mean Opinion Scores (MOS) (max. 5) and Preference in percentage.

</div>

**User Study.** We conduct a user study where we ask 15 participants to judge lip-sync videos generated in cross generation setting by   and two other methods. 20 videos were sampled from the VoxCeleb2’s test set and are driven by randomly selected driving audios. The participants rated the videos 1-5 (where higher is better) in the aspects of (1) **Visual quality** (2) **Lip-sync quality**, and (3) **Overall quality**. We used the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) measure to aggregate these ratings. Further, we record the percentage of times users preferred a method. We present the results in Table <a href="#tab:user_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:user_study">1</a>, where we see that our method surpasses others in all the categories. In terms of Lip-sync quality, this is opposed to our quantitative results, especially $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$. We speculate that $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$, might favor blurry generations with high temporal consistency while humans prefer high fidelity over slight temporal inconsistency.

## Ablations

We conduct an ablation study to showcase the contribution of various choices of losses that were used during training. Specifically, we train our model in three different settings in which we introduce an additional loss in each setting. First, in the setting, we train our model using only $`\mathcal{L}_\text{simple}`$ (Reconstruction). Second, we train another version of the model using $`\mathcal{L}_\text{simple}+\mathcal{L}_{2}+\mathcal{L}_\text{sync}`$ (+ SyncNet). Here intuitively the $`\mathcal{L}_\text{sync}`$ should introduce better synchronization. Third, we further add a perceptual loss $`\mathcal{L}_\text{sync}`$ (+ Pecept). We add this loss because adding the SyncNet loss led to worse image quality. Finally, we add the sequential adversarial loss $`\mathcal{L}_\text{GAN}`$ to achieve even temporal consistency(+ Seq. GAN). We test these on a smaller subset of 500 VoxCeleb2 test audio-video pairs in the cross generation setting as well as the reconstruction setting.

It can be seen in Table <a href="#tab:ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation">[tab:ablation]</a> that moving from “Reconstruction" to “+ SyncNet" gives a sudden improvement in the $`\text{Sync}_\text{c}`$ metric. This supports our intuition that only reconstruction-based losses are not enough. We also see that this transition deteriorates the image quality. This gets solved as we move to the “+ Perceptual" setting. Finally, the addition of sequential adversarial loss not just further improves the image quality but also improves the $`\text{Sync}_c`$, clearly showing the advantage of this loss. In the reconstruction setting in Table <a href="#tab:ablation_recon" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:ablation_recon">[tab:ablation_recon]</a>, most of these observations still hold except FID being lower for “+ Perceptual" than “+ Seq. GAN". This could be attributed to the static nature of the input source in this setting while the ground truth is moving.

## References

1. Commentary: ‘{The} 1-inch-tall barrier of subtitles’: {Bong} {Joon} {Ho}
  rightly calls out {Hollywood} myopia, Jan. 2020.
2. Christoph Bregler, Michele Covell, and Malcolm Slaney.
\newblock Video rewrite: Driving visual speech with audio.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 24th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques}, pages 353--360, 1997.
3. Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock How far are we from solving the 2d \& 3d face alignment problem? (and
  a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks).
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Computer Vision}, 2017.
4. Caroline Chan, Shiry Ginosar, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei~A Efros.
\newblock Everybody dance now.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision}, pages 5933--5942, 2019.
5. Lele Chen, Zhiheng Li, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Lip movements generation at a glance.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision
  (ECCV)}, pages 520--535, 2018.
6. Lele Chen, Ross~K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang Xu.
\newblock Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generationwith dynamic
  pixel-wise loss.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03820}, 2019. [arXiv:1905.03820](https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.03820)
7. Joon~Son Chung, Amir Jamaludin, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock You said that?
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1705.02966}, 2017. [arXiv:1705.02966](https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.02966)
8. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}, 2018. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
9. J.~S. Chung and A. Zisserman.
\newblock Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Workshop on Multi-view Lip-reading, ACCV}, 2016.
10. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lip reading in the wild.
\newblock In Shang-Hong Lai, Vincent Lepetit, Ko Nishino, and Yoichi Sato,
  editors, {\em Computer Vision -- ACCV 2016}, pages 87--103, Cham, 2017.
  Springer International Publishing.
11. Dipanjan Das, Sandika Biswas, Sanjana Sinha, and Brojeshwar Bhowmick.
\newblock Speech-driven facial animation using cascaded gans for learning of
  motion and texture.
\newblock In {\em Computer Vision--ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23--28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXX 16}, pages 408--424.
  Springer, 2020.
12. Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei.
\newblock Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database.
\newblock In {\em 2009 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
  recognition}, pages 248--255. Ieee, 2009.
13. Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol.
\newblock Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  34:8780--8794, 2021.
14. Patrick Esser, Johnathan Chiu, Parmida Atighehchian, Jonathan Granskog, and
  Anastasis Germanidis.
\newblock Structure and content-guided video synthesis with diffusion models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03011}, 2023. [arXiv:2302.03011](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03011)
15. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
  Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial networks.
\newblock {\em Communications of the ACM}, 63(11):139--144, 2020.
16. Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head
  synthesis.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 5784--5794, 2021.
17. Anchit Gupta, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Sindhu Balachandra, Faizan~Farooq Khan,
  Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock Towards generating ultra-high resolution talking-face videos with lip
  synchronization.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications
  of Computer Vision}, pages 5209--5218, 2023.
18. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
  Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash
  equilibrium.
\newblock In I. Guyon, U.~Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S.
  Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, {\em Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems}, volume~30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
19. Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel.
\newblock Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  33:6840--6851, 2020.
20. Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.
\newblock Classifier-free diffusion guidance.
\newblock In {\em NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and
  Downstream Applications}, 2021.
21. Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi,
  and David~J Fleet.
\newblock Video diffusion models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458}, 2022. [arXiv:2204.03458](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03458)
22. Qingqing Huang, Daniel~S Park, Tao Wang, Timo~I Denk, Andy Ly, Nanxin Chen,
  Zhengdong Zhang, Zhishuai Zhang, Jiahui Yu, Christian Frank, et~al.
\newblock Noise2music: Text-conditioned music generation with diffusion models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.03917}, 2023. [arXiv:2302.03917](https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.03917)
23. Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei~A Efros.
\newblock Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 1125--1134, 2017.
24. Xinya Ji, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xun Cao, and
  Feng Xu.
\newblock Audio-driven emotional video portraits.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 14080--14089, 2021.
25. Prajwal KR, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Jerin Philip, Abhishek Jha, Vinay
  Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock Towards automatic face-to-face translation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 27th ACM international conference on
  multimedia}, pages 1428--1436, 2019.
26. Avisek Lahiri, Vivek Kwatra, Christian Frueh, John Lewis, and Chris Bregler.
\newblock Lipsync3d: Data-efficient learning of personalized 3d talking faces
  from video using pose and lighting normalization.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 2755--2764, 2021.
27. Lincheng Li, Suzhen Wang, Zhimeng Zhang, Yu Ding, Yixing Zheng, Xin Yu, and
  Changjie Fan.
\newblock Write-a-speaker: Text-based emotional and rhythmic talking-head
  generation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence}, volume~35, pages 1911--1920, 2021.
28. Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu
  Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual
  control.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 3387--3396, 2022.
29. Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne Wu, and Bolei Zhou.
\newblock Semantic-aware implicit neural audio-driven video portrait
  generation.
\newblock In {\em Computer Vision--ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel
  Aviv, Israel, October 23--27, 2022, Proceedings, Part XXXVII}, pages
  106--125. Springer, 2022.
30. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-head
  animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 40(6):1--17, 2021.
31. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T Barron, Ravi
  Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
  synthesis.
\newblock {\em Communications of the ACM}, 65(1):99--106, 2021.
32. Alex Nichol, Prafulla Dhariwal, Aditya Ramesh, Pranav Shyam, Pamela Mishkin,
  Bob McGrew, Ilya Sutskever, and Mark Chen.
\newblock Glide: Towards photorealistic image generation and editing with
  text-guided diffusion models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.10741}, 2021. [arXiv:2112.10741](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.10741)
33. Alexander~Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal.
\newblock Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
\newblock In Marina Meila and Tong Zhang, editors, {\em Proceedings of the 38th
  International Conference on Machine Learning}, volume 139 of {\em Proceedings
  of Machine Learning Research}, pages 8162--8171. PMLR, 18--24 Jul 2021.
34. Se~Jin Park, Minsu Kim, Joanna Hong, Jeongsoo Choi, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Synctalkface: Talking face generation with precise lip-syncing via
  audio-lip memory.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence}, volume~36, pages 2062--2070, 2022.
35. KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
36. Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu, and Mark Chen.
\newblock Hierarchical text-conditional image generation with clip latents.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.06125}, 2022. [arXiv:2204.06125](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125)
37. Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Bj{\"o}rn
  Ommer.
\newblock High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 10684--10695, 2022.
38. Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox.
\newblock U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation.
\newblock In {\em Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
  Intervention--MICCAI 2015: 18th International Conference, Munich, Germany,
  October 5-9, 2015, Proceedings, Part III 18}, pages 234--241. Springer, 2015.
39. Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Huiwen Chang, Chris Lee, Jonathan Ho, Tim
  Salimans, David Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi.
\newblock Palette: Image-to-image diffusion models.
\newblock In {\em ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference Proceedings}, pages 1--10, 2022.
40. Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala Li, Jay Whang, Emily
  Denton, Seyed Kamyar~Seyed Ghasemipour, Burcu~Karagol Ayan, S~Sara Mahdavi,
  Rapha~Gontijo Lopes, et~al.
\newblock Photorealistic text-to-image diffusion models with deep language
  understanding.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11487}, 2022. [arXiv:2205.11487](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.11487)
41. Shuai Shen, Wenliang Zhao, Zibin Meng, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Jie Zhou, and
  Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Difftalk: Crafting diffusion models for generalized audio-driven
  portraits animation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 1982--1991, 2023.
42. Gaurav Shrivastava and Abhinav Shrivastava.
\newblock Diverse video generation using a gaussian process trigger.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.04619}, 2021. [arXiv:2107.04619](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.04619)
43. Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon.
\newblock Denoising diffusion implicit models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502}, 2020. [arXiv:2010.02502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502)
44. Linsen Song, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Everybody’s talkin’: Let me talk as you want.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security},
  17:585--598, 2022.
45. Yang Song, Jingwen Zhu, Dawei Li, Xiaolong Wang, and Hairong Qi.
\newblock Talking face generation by conditional recurrent adversarial network.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.04786}, 2018. [arXiv:1804.04786](https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.04786)
46. Yasheng Sun, Hang Zhou, Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Zhibin Hong, Jingtuo Liu,
  Errui Ding, Jingdong Wang, Ziwei Liu, and Koike Hideki.
\newblock Masked lip-sync prediction by audio-visual contextual exploitation in
  transformers.
\newblock In {\em SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers}, pages 1--9, 2022.
47. Supasorn Suwajanakorn, Steven~M Seitz, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
\newblock Synthesizing obama: learning lip sync from audio.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 36(4):1--13, 2017.
48. Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian Theobalt, and Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock In {\em Computer Vision--ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23--28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVI 16}, pages 716--731.
  Springer, 2020.
49. Ginette Vincendeau.
\newblock {Hollywood Babel: The Multiple Language Version}.
\newblock {\em Screen}, 29(2):24--39, 03 1988.
50. Konstantinos Vougioukas, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock End-to-end speech-driven facial animation with temporal gans.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.09313}, 2018. [arXiv:1805.09313](https://arxiv.org/abs/1805.09313)
51. Tengfei Wang, Ting Zhang, Bo Zhang, Hao Ouyang, Dong Chen, Qifeng Chen, and
  Fang Wen.
\newblock Pretraining is all you need for image-to-image translation.
\newblock In {\em arXiv}, 2022.
52. Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Guilin Liu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz,
  and Bryan Catanzaro.
\newblock Video-to-video synthesis.
\newblock In {\em Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
  (NeurIPS)}, 2018.
53. Zhou Wang, Alan~C Bovik, Hamid~R Sheikh, and Eero~P Simoncelli.
\newblock Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural
  similarity.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on image processing}, 13(4):600--612, 2004.
54. Tianyi Xie, Liucheng Liao, Cheng Bi, Benlai Tang, Xiang Yin, Jianfei Yang,
  Mingjie Wang, Jiali Yao, Yang Zhang, and Zejun Ma.
\newblock Towards realistic visual dubbing with heterogeneous sources.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on
  Multimedia}, pages 1739--1747, 2021.
55. Lingyun Yu, Jun Yu, Mengyan Li, and Qiang Ling.
\newblock Multimodal inputs driven talking face generation with
  spatial--temporal dependency.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology},
  31(1):203--216, 2020.
56. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei~A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang.
\newblock The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual
  metric.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 586--595, 2018.
57. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution
  audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 3661--3670, 2021.
58. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei
  Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized
  audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, 2021.
59. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis,
  and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG)}, 39(6):1--15, 2020.
