---
arxiv_id: '2312.02512'
title: 'AV2AV: Direct Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation with
  Unified Audio-Visual Speech Representation'
authors:
- Jeongsoo Choi
- Se Jin Park
- Minsu Kim
- Yong Man Ro
submitted: '2023-12-05'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.AI
- cs.MM
- eess.AS
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02512
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 31/108
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:21:39+00:00'
references_parsed: 108
arxiv_version: ''
---

[^1]

<figure id="fig:1" data-latex-placement="t!">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="./Figures/Figure1.pdf" style="width:8.5cm" />
</div>
<figcaption>Conceptual illustration of the proposed multilingual Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (AV2AV) framework. The system can directly translate between multilingual AV speech without requiring any text. Note that the proposed AV2AV can generate both audio speech and visual speech in listener-oriented (, translated) languages.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Introduction

In our increasingly interconnected world, where communication transcends linguistic boundaries, Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has played a critical role in breaking down barriers in multilingual interaction. Despite their strong performances, NMT systems exhibit limitations in seamless application to virtual conferences or face-to-face interactions. This is due to their reliance on human intervention for text input or speech recognition, as these systems primarily operate with text modalities. Speech-to-Speech Translation (A2A[^2]) can mitigate this problem by directly translating spoken languages into the target language at the audio level. With the growth of A2A technologies , it is anticipated that individuals can effortlessly communicate with one another using their primary languages, irrespective of their nationalities. However, there still exists one unsolved problem in the aspects of multimedia, the discrepancy between the translated speech and the visual stimuli. For example, if the A2A is utilized for video conferencing, people may experience mismatches between what the presented face says and what they hear. This arises because A2A exclusively processes audio speech without addressing the visual component. As inconsistent visual information can negatively affect the perception of speech, which is evidenced by the McGurk effect , a method jointly considering both audio and visual should be developed.

In this paper, we explore a novel direct Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (AV2AV) framework. Shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:1">1</a>, the proposed AV2AV can directly translate the input Audio-Visual (AV) speech into the desired target language with multimodal experience (, with both audio and visual streams). Therefore, with the proposed AV2AV, 1) We can provide a real face-to-face-like conversation experience enabling participants to engage in discussions using their respective primary languages, mitigating the aforementioned mismatched experience. 2) We can improve the robustness of the system with the complemental information of multimodalities so that the translation can be accurately performed even under noisy environments. 3) We can reduce the computational and maintenance costs, compared to the previous 4-stage cascaded Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (A2AV) approaches which sequentially performed Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) , NMT , Text-to-Speech Synthesis (TTS) , and audio-driven Talking Face Generation (TFG) . In today’s world, where millions of multimedia content pieces are generated daily and shared globally in diverse languages, the demand for systems like the proposed AV2AV is anticipated to increase.

However, there is a crucial challenge that must be addressed in the development of a direct AV2AV framework; the lack of translation data between AV speech. Multilingual translation typically requires a large amount of parallel data. While there are relatively abundant text-based datasets for NMT and speech-based datasets for Speech-to-Text Translation (A2T) and A2A , there is no publicly available parallel AV2AV corpus. One possible solution could be generating AV translation data, by separately synthesizing speech and video by applying TTS and TFG onto the existing NMT, A2T, and A2A datasets. Nevertheless, training the model with synthetic face video does not guarantee sufficient final performance, considering the current limitations of TFG in faithfully modeling accurate lip movements .

Instead, our strategy is to employ unified AV speech representations of the recent self-supervised model, AV-HuBERT , which is proven to have the modality-agnostic characteristics . Since its pre-training includes modality dropout, we can reliably obtain unified AV speech representations, whether utilizing audio-only, visual-only, or audio-visual inputs . Motivated by this, we show that the proposed AV2AV can be trained with audio-only data (, A2A dataset) to perform translation between AV speech. To this end, we introduce a multilingual trained AV-HuBERT (mAV-HuBERT), by pre-training the model with about 7,000 hours of a multilingual AV dataset containing over 100 languages. Then, the unified AV speech representations from mAV-HuBERT are discretized through K-means clustering , yielding AV speech units. By treating the discretized AV speech units as pseudo text , we train our multilingual spoken language translation model. At this time, we employ the modality-agnostic characteristics of AV-HuBERT and utilize audio-only datasets (, A2A datasets) to extract the AV speech units by masking out the visual input stream of mAV-HuBERT. Finally, to render the audio and visual components from the translated AV speech units, we introduce an AV speech unit-based AV-Renderer that can generate synchronized raw speech audio and talking face video in parallel. Especially, the proposed AV-Renderer is designed with zero-shot speaker modeling ability, enabling the preservation of the speaker’s voice and face in both audio and video before and after translation.

The contributions of this paper can be summarized as follows: 1) To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work exploring direct Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (AV2AV), whose inputs and outputs are both audio-visual speech. 2) In order to mitigate the absence of translation data between AV speech, we employ the modality-agnostic characteristics of AV-HuBERT and propose to train the spoken language translation part with the audio-only dataset. At the inference, we show that the trained model with audio-only data can accept any combination of modalities, audio-only, visual-only, and audio-visual inputs, and can produce multimodal speech outputs. 3) For the seamless experience of translated AV speech, we design a zero-shot speaker AV-Renderer. With the proposed AV-Renderer, we can maintain the speaker identity of both audio and video streams before and after translating the AV speech. 4) We explore the AV2AV in a many-to-many language translation setting, so one model can perform X-to-X language translations where X is multilingual, while previous multimodal speech translation systems (, AV2A) can perform only one specific language direction.

# Related Works

## Spoken Language Translation

Neural Machine Translation (NMT) has achieved maturity in the modality with the richest data, text. Given that audio modality enables the translation between languages that have no writing systems and the more improved dialogue experience, speech-based translation has emerged. Speech-to-Speech Translation (A2A) aims to translate speech from one language to the semantically consistent speech of another language. Early A2A works began with a cascaded approach by sequentially performing ASR, NMT, and TTS. Subsequently, A2T works were proposed to merge the ASR and NMT stages, and allowed a two-stage A2A system. Recently, it has evolved even into a direct approach that can directly translate speech without relying on intermediate text representation.

Despite the recent success of audio-based speech translation, multimodal (, audio and visual) speech translation is in its very early stages. One line of research focuses on language translation between audio input and audio-visual output, namely Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (A2AV). They utilized a 4-stage cascaded approach by chaining ASR, NMT, TTS, and TFG. Specifically, audio from the source video is first transcribed into text with an ASR . Then, the text is translated from the source language to the target language through NMT . The translated text is synthesized into speech using TTS , and finally, the talking face video is synthesized from the synthesized speech using TFG . Although the cascaded approach can benefit from the advantage of advancement made in each of the subsystems, they might suffer from slow inference time, domain mismatch, error propagation between the subsystems, and high maintenance costs. Most recently, AV-TranSpeech first proposed direct Audio-Visual Speech-to-Speech Translation (AV2A), whose input is now audio-visual speech and output is audio. By using AV inputs, they showed that the robustness of the translation system on acoustic noise can be improved . Also, they tried to solve the insufficient AV2A training data by bringing pre-trained weights for each modal stream from different pre-trained models .

Different from the previous works, this is the first work to explore a direct Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (AV2AV). The proposed AV2AV incorporates both audio and visual speech as inputs, translates the linguistic content, and produces both audio and visual speech outputs. Moreover, our method is a direct approach where we do not go through with any intermediate text or speech. This is a huge leap from the current 4-stage process in A2AV. Moreover, different from AV-TranSpeech tried to use different pre-trained models to initialize their model and finetuned it on small size AV2A dataset, the proposed AV2AV model can be trained on an audio-only A2A dataset with unified AV speech representations. The trained model can be directly applied to AV2AV without finetuning. Once trained, we can perform all A2AV, V2AV, and AV2AV, with one single trained model. Finally, we propose a zero-shot AV-Renderer enabling the maintenance of the speaker characteristics of source AV speech at the outputs.

## Self-supervised Speech Model and Speech Units

Self-supervised speech models have achieved significant performance in various speech processing tasks such as ASR , speaker verification , and speech translation . HuBERT , one of the prominent self-supervised speech models, is trained to predict hidden units obtained by clustering MFCC features from the masked input, where the hidden units are progressively refined using its learned features. Once the speech features obtained from specific layers are clustered into speech units , they can be utilized as pseudo texts containing the linguistic content of speech. By treating the discrete speech units as pseudo text, various speech processing technologies were proposed such as spoken language modeling and speech translation .

Extending the modalities, self-supervised multimodal speech models have been proposed. Among them, AV-HuBERT shows promising results in diverse multimodal speech modeling, visual speech recognition , AV speech recognition , and lip-to-speech synthesis . Recently, its modality-agnostic AV speech representations have drawn big attention in speech recognition and Visual Speech Translation (V2T) . Previous works showed that we can robustly get unified AV speech representations with diverse input modalities, audio-only, visual-only, and audio-visual. This is possible because AV-HuBERT proceeds pre-training with modality dropout.

Motivated by the recent success of discrete speech units of HuBERT, we also propose to train our translation system with discretized AV speech units by treating them as pseudo text. As the proposed system is a multimodal system, we employ AV-HuBERT to extract the AV speech units. Moreover, inspired by the modality-agnostic characteristics of AV-HuBERT representations, we propose to train our AV2AV translation model with audio-only datasets (, A2A datasets), by dropping out the visual stream when extracting the AV speech units. To better capture the multilingual speech features, we introduce mAV-HuBERT which is trained on about 7,000 hours of multilingual AV dataset.

<figure id="fig:2" data-latex-placement="t!">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="./Figures/Figure2.pdf" style="width:17cm" />
</div>
<figcaption>(a) We extract unified audio-visual speech representations using multilingual trained AV-HuBERT. The speech features are discretized into audio-visual speech units through quantization and treated as pseudo text. (b) By using audio-visual speech units, we translate between multilingual languages using a transformer encoder-decoder model. (c) The audio speech and visual speech are generated in parallel from the translated audio-visual speech units by using the proposed Zero-shot AV-Renderer. The renderer can perform in a zero-shot setting so that we can keep the speaker identity the same before and after the translation.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Proposed Method

The proposed direct multilingual Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (AV2AV) framework aims to directly translate both audio stream and visual stream of an input face video from one language to another. To this end, the proposed system is designed with three main parts; 1) extracting linguistic content from the AV input with AV speech units (Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>a), 2) performing language translation using the AV speech units (Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>b), and 3) synthesizing each modal speech where the linguistic content comes from the translated AV speech units, while the speaker characteristics are controllable (Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>c).

## Unified Audio-Visual Speech Representations

In order to train the AV2AV system, basically, a parallel corpus of AV speech is required. However, publicly available speech translation datasets are ‘audio to text’ (A2T) , ‘audio to audio’ (A2A) , and ‘audio-visual to audio’ (AV2A) . As there is no available ‘audio-visual to audio-visual’ (AV2AV) translation data, it is not feasible to train our model in a parallel AV2AV data setting. To mitigate this, we propose to train our translation model with the audio-only parallel corpus (, A2A dataset), by learning the unified representations of audio and visual speech in advance. Motivated by the recent studies showing that the AV-HuBERT can extract unified AV speech representations regardless of input modality, our strategy is training our spoken language translation model with the unified AV representations obtained by using audio-only inputs, where the corresponding visual input is dropped out.

Concretely, we introduce a multilingual trained AV-HuBERT, mAV-HuBERT, to fit it for our multilingual modeling purpose. Different from the English-based AV-HuBERT model , mAV-HuBERT is pre-trained on about 7,000 hours of multilingual audio-visual data by combining LRS2 , LRS3 , VoxCeleb2 , mTEDx , and AVSpeech , which altogether contains approximately over 100 languages. Then, we discretize the unified AV speech representations of mAV-HuBERT through quantization (, K-means clustering) and obtain AV speech units, following . As our mAV-HuBERT is trained with modality dropout similar to AV-HuBERT , we can robustly obtain the AV speech units by using different input modalities, audio-only, visual-only, and audio-visual. This enables us to train our AV2AV translation model using an audio-only parallel corpus dataset, while still allowing inference with audio-visual inputs. The processes for obtaining AV speech units are illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>(a). It is important to note that the discretized speech unit predominantly encompasses speech content, offering a significant advantage as it can be effectively treated as pseudo text . Following , we reduce the length of AV speech units by removing adjacent repeating units.

## Multilingual Spoken Language Translation

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>(b), our AV2AV language translation model is composed of a standard transformer encoder-decoder architecture which consists of a 12-layer unit-encoder and a 12-layer unit-decoder, similar to a popular NMT system . Following the recent A2A method that can perform many-to-many spoken language translation, the unit-encoder takes a source language token \<$`L_s`$\> that is for indicating which language should be comprehended and the source AV speech units $`\mathbf{u}_s=\{u_s^i\}_{i=1}^{T_s}`$, where $`T_s`$ refers to the length of units. Then, the unit-decoder takes a target language token \<$`L_t`$\> that determines the output language and its previous predictions $`u_t^{<j}`$ to autoregressively predict the next AV speech unit $`u_t^j`$ of the target language at step $`j`$. Therefore, the loss function to train the AV2AV language translation can be represented as
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{4pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{4pt}
\mathcal{L}=-\sum_{j=1}^{T_t}\log p(u_t^j \mid u_t^{<j}, \mathbf{u}_s),
\end{equation}
```
where $`T_t`$ refers to the length of target AV speech units.

As described before, we can obtain the AV speech units $`\mathbf{u}_s`$ and $`\mathbf{u}_t=\{u_t^i\}_{i=1}^{T_t}`$ robustly by using different types of input modalities, audio-only, visual-only, and audio-visual. Therefore, we train our AV2AV language translation model with a large A2A parallel dataset constructed with mTEDx and VoxPopuli . The total data amount is about 12,000 hours composed of 19 languages and by reversing the translation direction, the data amount is doubled. Following , we pre-train the model in many-to-many translation setting on the constructed A2A dataset and finetune the pre-trained model on the target datasets (, MuAViC and LRS3-T ), respectively. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:3">3</a>, we show that the model trained with the proposed strategy can perform A2AV, V2AV, and AV2AV with a single model.

## Zero-shot Audio-Visual Renderer

The translated AV speech units should be rendered to audio and video to produce the sound and visual movement that humans can perceive. To this end, we introduce a zero-shot AV-Renderer which simultaneously synthesizes the raw audio and video from the AV speech units as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>(c). The crucial aspect is to preserve the speaker identity from the source AV speech to the translated AV speech, ensuring a seamless communication experience for the participants. To achieve this, the proposed AV-Renderer is devised in a zero-shot speaker setting. Only the linguistic content of the translated speech is extracted from the translated AV speech units, while the non-linguistic characteristics are modeled from the source AV speech. The proposed AV-Renderer is comprised of three main components, a length predictor, vocoder, and face renderer.

<figure id="fig:3" data-latex-placement="t!">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="./Figures/Figure3.pdf" style="width:8.5cm" />
</div>
<figcaption>Overview of the proposed AV2AV framework. A single AV2AV model can perform A2AV, V2AV, and AV2AV by learning with unified AV speech representations of mAV-HuBERT.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Length Predictor.** As the output audio and visual streams are expected to be synchronized, we only need one common duration modeling for the two output streams. To this end, a length predictor is employed to predict the duration of each AV speech unit. The predicted duration is utilized for synthesizing both audio and visual outputs. Similar to that of TTS , it consists of two 1D convolution layers with one classifier and is trained with Mean Squared Error loss measured between the prediction and ground truth duration of each unit in the logarithmic domain, as in . The translated AV speech units are repeated by the predicted duration before passing the vocoder and face renderer.

**Vocoder.** For the vocoder, we basically follow the previous works that utilized speech unit-based HiFi-GAN and we additionally add the zero-shot speaker modeling ability to the model, as the previous works only support the single-speaker voice. To this end, we leverage a pre-trained speaker verification model of as a speaker encoder to extract the speaker embedding, similar to multi-speaker TTS . It takes a Mel-spectrogram and produces a single speaker embedding, known as a d-vector . The d-vector is concatenated to every embedded feature of the AV speech unit where it is embedded by an embedding layer (, Unit2Speech in Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>(c)). The concatenated features are fed into the speech decoder whose architecture and training objective are the same as HiFi-GAN , to produce the waveform.

**Face Renderer.** For the face renderer, we bring the famous audio-driven face synthesis model, Wav2Lip , and modify it to operate with AV speech units as inputs. As Wav2Lip can generate arbitrary face videos from arbitrary audio, it is appropriate for our zero-shot purpose. Specifically, the source identity feature and pose feature are extracted from a source identity face and a pose prior (upper half of the driving source faces) by a face encoder, as shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:2">2</a>(c). The discrete AV speech units are embedded into continuous features through a Unit2Lip encoder which consists of an embedding layer and a transformer layer . Subsequently, the embedded features and identity features are jointly decoded to generate the target talking face video. It is trained with the same objective functions as .

# Experiment

<figure id="fig:4" data-latex-placement="t!">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="./Figures/Figure4.pdf" style="width:17.5cm" />
</div>
<figcaption>Synthesized outputs of the proposed AV2AV method. The first row is the source input, while the second and third rows are the translated outputs in different target languages. The transcriptions are obtained using an ASR. The highlighted segment of the transcriptions indicates the temporal alignment with the video frames above, and the corresponding phoneme for each frame is marked below. Please note the speaker is maintained in the translated results even if we translate into different languages.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Dataset

For training m-AVHuBERT, we use 7,011 hours of multilingual AV data by combining LRS2 , LRS3 , VoxCeleb2 , mTEDx , and AVspeech .

For training AV2AV language translation model, we use about 12k hours of parallel A2A data containing 19 languages constructed with Voxpopuli and mTEDx in a many-to-many language translation setting, following . Then, we finetune the pre-trained model on each evaluation dataset, LRS3-T and MuAViC . The LRS3-T is AV2A data, derived from the LRS3 dataset . It contains the translation direction of En-Es and En-Fr. MuAViC is an audio-visual speech-to-text translation (AV2T) corpus sourced from TED and TEDx. Since it only provides target text, we generate the target speech by using pre-trained TTS models, VITS , on each language[^3]. We utilize 4 English (En)-to-X and 4 X-to-En paired data, where X is Spanish (Es), French (Fr), Portuguese (Pt), and Italian (It), which gives a total duration of 2,356 hours. The opposite translation direction is also used for training.

For training the vocoder, we use LRS3 for En and mTEDx for other languages. For the face renderer, we follow and utilize the widely used LRS3 dataset.

## Evaluation Metrics

We evaluate the translation quality and the generation quality of both audio and video. For the translation quality, we employ the BLEU score by transcribing the audio using the off-the-shelf ASR models, following . To measure the generation quality of video, we adopt metrics used for TFG. This includes Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) to measure visual quality, and LSE-C and LSE-D to measure the audio-visual synchronization. Also, we conduct a Mean Opinion Score test to measure the naturalness of each respective modality, and the realness of the video, which can be found in Supplementary.

## Implementation Details

For pre-training mAV-HuBERT, we crop the mouth region into a size of 96$`\times`$<!-- -->96 by using face detector and facial landmark detector . The cropped mouth frames are converted into grayscale and random cropping and horizontal flipping are applied during training. The audio is resampled to 16kHz and random noise augmentation is applied using MUSAN and overlapped speech, as in . We initialize the model with English-trained AV-HuBERT and train it with the same training objective with it. To obtain the target cluster, we use pre-trained multilingual HuBERT and obtain 1,000 clusters. We train the model for 150k steps with a max token length of 1,000 using 63 GPUs. Our AV speech units are obtained by clustering the unified AV representations into 1,000 clusters.

For training the multilingual AV2AV translation model, we initialize the model with a pre-trained A2A model and pre-train it on parallel A2A translation data using the AV speech units driven from mAV-HuBERT for 30k steps with a max token length 1,024 using 56 GPUs. The pre-trained model is finetuned on target datasets for 30k steps.

For training the vocoder, we update 1M steps using a batch size of 16 on each language dataset. The face renderer is trained for 35k steps with a batch size of 64.

<div class="table*">

</div>

## Baseline Models

Since there is no previous method that can perform AV2AV, we compare the proposed method with the recently proposed direct AV2A method, AV-TranSpeech on LRS3-T dataset. Moreover, we compare the translation performance with different cascaded methods on MuAViC dataset. They are built from state-of-the-art off-the-shelf pre-trained models: AVSR , ASR , AV2T , A2T , NMT , TTS , and TFG . Please note the objective of the comparisons with the cascaded method is not to achieve state-of-the-art performance, but rather to assess the extent to which the performance of the proposed system can be attained through the direct strategy.

The AVSR and ASR models are trained on the multilingual audio-visual corpus, covering 1,200 hours of 9 languages. The AV2T and A2T models support X-to-En language translations with one model while multiple unidirectional models are used for En-to-X translations. Therefore, we use one pre-trained AV2T or A2T model for {Es, Fr, It, Pt}-En translation, while we use 4 individual models for En-Es, En-Fr, En-It, and En-Pt translations. The NMT model is trained on the many-to-many text translation corpus comprising 7.5B sentences for 100 languages. The TTS model is a recent state-of-the-art multilingual TTS model by Team Coqui. The TFG model is one of the popular models that can generate arbitrary identities and languages, trained on 233 hours of audio-visual data.

## Experimental Results

### Comparisons with State-of-the-art

We compare the AV2A performance with the state-of-the-art direct AV2A method, AV-Transpeech , by using different amounts of finetuning data, in Table <a href="#table:6" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:6">[table:6]</a>. The results show that the proposed method is much more effective than AV-Transpeech, especially in the low-resource setting. As the proposed method can be pre-trained using A2A dataset to perform with different input modalities, the pre-trained model can be directly applied to AV2A without finetuning. In contrast, since AV-Transpeech tries to bring different pre-trained models (, AV-HuBERT and A2A models) to initialize different parts of their model, the finetuning with the AV2A dataset is mandatory. Even when no finetuning is applied, the proposed method outperforms AV-Transpeech that finetuned on 10hr of AV2A dataset, and achieves comparable performances with the model finetuned on 30hr of dataset. If we finetune the proposed model with the same amount of AV2A dataset as AV-Transpeech, it outperforms AV-Transpeech at all data sizes. This shows the effectiveness of the proposed strategy of learning from A2A dataset by using unified audio-visual speech representations. Fig. <a href="#fig:4" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:4">4</a> shows the translated results of the proposed AV2AV framework. We show both audio and visual outputs where the audio is transcribed into text through ASR.

### Comparisons with Cascaded Approaches

Table <a href="#table:1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:1">[table:1]</a> shows the BLEU score of different systems for different language pairs. The analysis of results is as follows.

**(A2, A4 vs. A8)** By comparing the methods that can perform AV2AV, the proposed method (A8) shows comparable results with the text-based translation systems trained on 7.5B parallel data (A2, A4), even though it is trained without using any text supervision. This demonstrates that AV speech units encompass sufficient linguistic content, allowing the training of a multilingual AV2AV translation model solely using the discretized AV speech units[^4].

**(A1, A2 vs. A3, A4 vs. A5 vs. A6, A8)** We can find that by reducing the cascading stages and shortening the processing time, the BLEU scores become slightly worse overall. This result is attributed to the powerful performance of each advanced subsystem, which benefits from a large-scale dataset. However, we can clearly find that the proposed direct multimodal speech-to-speech translation systems are comparable with the cascaded systems with just a single model. Specifically, the proposed method achieves better performance than the 3-stage cascaded systems (A3, A4) in the X-to-En translation direction. Please note that A1, A2, A3, and A4 use one model for X-to-En and 4 different models to perform En-to-X translation, while the proposed method uses just a single trained model to perform all 8 translation directions in the table. Another important thing is that A5 and the proposed systems are textless so that they can be utilized for the languages that have no writing systems , while A1, A2, A3, and A4 cannot be applied to such languages as they rely on text modalities.

**(A5 vs. A6, A7, A8)** By comparing the proposed method with A2A method (A5), the proposed A2AV method (A6) shows better performances in overall. Moreover, We can confirm that even though the proposed method is pre-trained with the same dataset as A5, the proposed method can be utilized for diverse tasks, including A2AV, V2AV, and AV2AV. This is because the proposed method is trained on unified audio-visual speech representations, eliminating the need for additional training to operate with different modalities. In contrast, A5 utilized audio speech representations during training, so it requires additional finetuning to accept different modal inputs.

### Analysis of Robustness to Acoustic Noise

In Table <a href="#table:5" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:5">[table:5]</a>, we evaluate the noise robustness of different systems. Following , we randomly perturb the input speech with the sampled babble noise from the test set of with varying SNR levels (-5, 0, 5, 10dB). By comparing audio-only input systems with multimodal systems (B1, B3, B5 vs. B2, B4, B7), we can confirm the benefits of using AV inputs by obtaining robust performances under acoustic noises. These results show the importance of AV input systems to achieve robust performance in practical situations. The visual input system (B6) is not affected by acoustic noise and even achieves better performance than audio-only systems (B1, B3, B5) under a severely noisy environment (, -5 dB). As one trained AV2AV model can be employed for diverse tasks, we can choose the input modalities appropriate to a given situation.

### Effectiveness of the mAV-HuBERT

In order to evaluate the effectiveness of our multilingual AV-HuBERT (mAV-HuBERT) compared to the original English-trained AV-HuBERT of , we compare the BLEU scores on MuAViC X-En translation directions. Table <a href="#table:3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:3">[table:3]</a> shows the comparison results. The results clearly show that we can improve the multilingual spoken language translation performance largely by pre-training the model with a large-scale multilingual AV dataset (, 7,011 hours with over 100 languages). Conversely, AV-HuBERT trained exclusively in English struggles to accurately capture multilingual speech information, resulting in lower translation performance across all translation directions.

### Quantitative Evaluation of AV-Renderer

In Table <a href="#table:2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:2">[table:2]</a>, we evaluate the visual quality (FID), and degree of synchronization between the generated audio and visual streams (LSE-C and LSE-D). To focus on the performance of renderers, we utilize ground truth audio, text, and AV speech units to generate audio or video for each system. Comparing (C1, C2, C3, C4), the results indicate that the proposed AV-Renderer can generate well-synchronized audio-visual outputs by synthesizing them in parallel, with shared duration information. In contrast, C3 loses accurate synchronization by cascading TTS and TFG, where system error could be propagated between generated samples.

In Table <a href="#table:7" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:7">[table:7]</a>, we evaluate the effectiveness of incorporating zero-shot speaker modeling into the vocoder. To this end, we first compare the BLEU and voice similarity (SIM) using WavLM-TDNN between a single speaker-trained vocoder and our zero-shot speaker vocoder. The results confirm that by employing speaker embedding, we do not lose the translation performance, and we can improve the voice similarity (SIM). Please note that this is a key component for seamless speech-to-speech translation. To understand the SIM score, we also report that of a popular multi-speaker TTS, YourTTS , and we can confirm that the proposed zero-shot speaker vocoder has sufficient ability to maintain the speaker’s voice.

# Conclusion

In this paper, we proposed a novel direct Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (AV2AV) framework. The proposed AV2AV can translate spoken languages in a many-to-many setting without text. By employing multimodal inputs, we can improve the robustness of the system to the acoustic noises. By using multimodal outputs, we can improve the dialogue experience performed in virtual scenarios with no discomfort. The effectiveness of the proposed AV2AV is evaluated with extensive experiments.

# Human Subject Study on Audio-Visual Quality

In order to evaluate the synthesized quality of audio and video, we conducted a Mean Opinion Score (MOS) test. We gathered 20 participants and asked them to evaluate 32 generated samples of each method to rate in terms of Audio Quality (AQ), Visual Quality (VQ), and overall Realness (R). We presented the audio stream only to evaluate the AQ, the visual stream only for the VQ, and the audio-visual stream altogether to evaluate the R. We compare against the best-performing cascaded system, which is the 4-stage cascaded system of AVSR, NMT, TTS, and TFG. The MOS results are shown in Table <a href="#table:8" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:8">[table:8]</a>. The result demonstrates that we can attain comparable performances with the proposed direct AV2AV approach as with the 4-stage cascaded method comprising state-of-the-art subsystems. Specifically, when both audio and visual streams are simultaneously presented, the participants assess the proposed method more seamlessly generates the two modalities than the cascaded method, as shown in the table (, Realness (R)).

# Dataset Statistics

**For training the m-AVHuBERT**, we use a total of 7,011 hours of the following combined AV datasets.

**LRS2** is an English audio-visual dataset, containing 233 hours of training data from British TV shows.

**LRS3** is an English audio-visual dataset consisting of approximately 430 hours of video clips from TED and TEDx.

**VoxCeleb2** is a large-scale multilingual corpus for speaker recognition. It has over 1 million utterances from 6,112 celebrities of 145 different nationalities.

**AVSpeech** is a large-scale multilingual corpus comprising 4700 hours of video clips with no interfering background noises sourced from a total of 290k YouTube videos.

**mTEDx** is a multilingual corpus built for speech recognition and speech translation sourced from TEDx talks. It consists of 8 languages; Spanish (Es), French (Fr), Italian (It), Portuguese (Pt), Russian (Ru), Greek (El), Arabic (Ar), and German (De). We use cleaned data of Es, Fr, It, and Pt following .

**For pretraining** the AV2AV language translation model, we use a total of 12k hours of the following A2A datasets. Please refer to for detailed data statistics for each translation pair.

**Voxpopuli** is a multilingual A2A corpus from European Parliament even recordings. Following , we use translation from 15 source languages to 15 target languages, which results in 11.2k hours of translation data.

**mTEDx** contains speech-to-text translation data from English (En) to Es, Fr, Pt, It, Ru, and El. Since it does not have target speech, we use generated speech from a pretrained TTS model which gives a total duration of 0.7k hours as in .

**For evaluation, we finetune** the AV2AV model on the following evaluation datasets. The detailed information for each translation pair is shown in Table <a href="#table:9" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:9">[table:9]</a> and Table <a href="#table:11" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:11">[table:11]</a>

**MuAViC** is a multilingual corpus for audio-visual speech recognition and audio-visual speech-to-text translation (AV2T). It reuses videos of LRS3 and mTEDx datasets including 1,200 hours of transcribed text from over 8000 speakers in 9 languages. Their transcriptions are generated by using an NMT model. Since it only provides target text, we generate the target speech by using pretrained TTS models, VITS on each language. We utilize 4 En-to-X and 4 X-to-En paired data, where X is Es, Fr, Pt, and It, which gives a total of 2,356 hours.

**LRS3-T** is an AV2A corpus curated from the LRS3 dataset by converting the transcribed English text into the speech in target languages. It results in 200 hours of parallel AV2A translation pairs for En-to-Es and En-to-Fr.

# Additional Results

## Generated Results

We show more generated translation results of the proposed AV2AV system in Fig. <a href="#fig:6" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:6">6</a>. The AV2AV system seamlessly translates the input video into the target language by transforming the mouth region while keeping the head pose and identity unchanged. The mouth movement aligns well with the corresponding phonemes as written under each video frame. The transcription obtained from ASR of the generated speech is also semantically coherent with the source speech. Moreover, since our model has been trained in many-to-many settings, our model supports translation into multiple different target languages. As shown in the second and third rows of (a-d), it can faithfully generate translated audio and visual speech in different target languages from a single source input.

Refer to the demo video for more demonstrations of the generated translation results. The demo consists of four parts: the first part shows En-X results on LRS3-T data, the second part shows X-EN results on mTEDx data, the third part compares the proposed method with the best-performing cascaded system, and the last part presents results on a completely different domain, the HDTF data, The HDTF is a high-resolution (720P or 1080P) audio-visual dataset for TFG. For HDTF testing, please note that we have trained the face renderer on the HDTF dataset and attached a face enhancer to support high-resolution synthesis of HDTF data.

<figure id="fig:5" data-latex-placement="t!">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="./Figures/Graph.pdf" style="width:8.5cm" />
</div>
<figcaption>Evaluation of the robustness of the proposed AV2AV system using different input modalities on acoustic noise.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:6" data-latex-placement="h">
<div class="minipage">
<embed src="./Figures/Figure5.pdf" style="width:16cm" />
</div>
<figcaption>(a-d) Translated results of the proposed AV2AV, each of which the first row is the source input and the second and third rows are the translated outputs in different target languages.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Noise Robustness

We visualize the robustness of the proposed AV2AV system to acoustic noise. Specifically, we perturb the clean audio input with the babble noise of MUSAN by varying Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) levels from -5 dB to 10 dB. The BLEU score of the translated results on MuAViC Es-En data is shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:5" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:5">5</a>. As the visual stream is not affected by the acoustic noise, the visual-only case shows the constant BLEU score for all noise levels. In contrast, the audio-only model is mostly affected by the acoustic noise, and the performance is greatly decreased when the noise becomes strong. The interesting thing is that the audio-only model even shows worse performance than the visual-only model in the severely noisy case (, -5 dB). Therefore, it would be better to utilize a visual-only model in a very noisy situation. When we utilize multimodal inputs, audio-visual, the model shows robust performances to the acoustic noise. The model always shows the best performances for all noise levels. Even if the noise is strong, so that the SNR is -5 or 0 dB, the audio-visual model still can robustly translate the speech. The results show the importance of using multimodal inputs for practical usage of speech processing systems.

# Implementation Details

The mAV-HuBERT has the same architecture as the AV-HuBERT large configuration which consists of 24 transformer encoder layers with 16 attention heads, a feed-forward dimension of 4,096, and an embedding dimension of 1,024. We initialize the model with an AV-HuBERT pretrained on 1,759 hours of English subset of LRS3 and VoxCeleb2. Given the masked audio and visual streams as input, it aims to predict the corresponding target clusters extracted from a pretrained multilingual HuBERT . During training, we apply modality dropout with a probability of 0.5. To extract the AV speech units, we cluster the unified AV representation into 1,000 clusters using k-mean clustering. Please refer to Table <a href="#table:10" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:10">[table:10]</a> for training configurations.

The AV2AV model is composed of an encoder embedding layer, 12 transformer encoder layers, 12 transformer decoder layers, and decoder embedding layers. The unit vocabulary size is 1,000 and the embedding dimension of each unit is 1,024. Both the unit encoder and the unit decoder have 8 attention heads and a feed-forward dimension of 4,096. The unit encoder is conditioned on the source language token and the unit decoder generates the target AV speech units conditioned on the target language token. We initialize the model from the mHuBERT unit-based A2A model and pretrain it based on our AV speech units on parallel A2A translation data for 30k steps with a max token length of 1,024 using the training configuration settings as shown in Table <a href="#table:12" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:12">[table:12]</a>. Then, the pretrained model is further fine-tuned on the evaluation datasets for 30k steps following the configuration settings in Table <a href="#table:13" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table:13">[table:13]</a>. The number of GPUs is adjusted according to the dataset size when fine-tuning on the LRS-T dataset and the model with the best performance in the validation set was used. During training, we utilized AV speech units extracted from audio-only, while at inference, we can use AV speech units extracted from any of audio-only, visual-only, and audio-visual data to perform A2AV, V2AV, and AV2AV.

The vocoder is based on the unit-based HiFi-GAN vocoder with an additional speaker encoder to extract the speaker embedding, a d-vector . The AV speech units are embedded into 128-dimension through an embedding layer, and the d-vector is also embedded into 128-dimension with a linear projection. The two embeddings from the AVspeech units and the d-vector are channel-wise concatenated at each timestep. We train the vocoder with a length predictor for 1M steps on individual languages with 1 GPU and a batch size of 16. The face renderer is based on a TFG model, Wav2Lip . The AV speech units are embedded by an embedding layer of dimension 512 and a single transformer Encoder layer, which are channel-wise concatenated with the corresponding identity features. We train the face renderer for 35k steps with 1 GPU and a batch size of 64. Learning rate of 1e-4 and Adam optimizer are used for both the vocoder and the face renderer.

# Advantages of Direct AV2AV Approach

By employing the proposed direct AV2AV approach, we can gain several advantages compared to utilizing cascaded systems. **1) Inference speed.** As the proposed system does not go through with the intermediate text representations, the inference speed is faster than the cascaded system. We compared the inference speed with the best-performed cascaded system (, A2 in Table 2). On average, the proposed AV2AV approach required 1.36s, whereas the cascaded system took 2.42s to process 2.03s video (, audio-visual) for the complete pipeline. **2) Model size.** Compared to the cascaded systems, the proposed direct AV2AV approach has a smaller model size. The number of parameters of the cascaded system is 1,490M parameters in total. In contrast, the proposed AV2AV has 732M parameters. **3) Text-free ability.** As the proposed AV2AV can be trained without using text data, the system can be served even for languages having no writing systems, while the cascaded systems cannot.

[^1]: $`^*`$Equal contribution. $`^\dagger`$Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. NRF-2022R1A2C2005529), Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.2022-0-00124, Development of Artificial Intelligence Technology for Self-Improving Competency-Aware Learning Capabilities), and BK21 FOUR (Connected AI Education & Research Program for Industry and Society Innovation, KAIST EE, No. 4120200113769).

[^2]: Throughout this paper, we employ abbreviations for input and output modalities, using A for Audio, V for Visual, and T for Text.

[^3]: Available on <https://github.com/coqui-ai/TTS>

[^4]: Moreover, the proposed method has a faster inference time. On average, the proposed AV2AV required 1.36s, whereas the cascaded system (A2) took 2.42s to process 2.03s video (, audio-visual).

## References

1. Rico Sennrich, Barry Haddow, and Alexandra Birch.
\newblock Improving neural machine translation models with monolingual data.
\newblock In {\em 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, pages 86--96. Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), 2016.
2. Melvin Johnson, Mike Schuster, Quoc~V Le, Maxim Krikun, Yonghui Wu, Zhifeng Chen, Nikhil Thorat, Fernanda Vi{\'e}gas, Martin Wattenberg, Greg Corrado, et~al.
\newblock Google’s multilingual neural machine translation system: Enabling zero-shot translation.
\newblock {\em Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 5:339--351, 2017.
3. Felix Stahlberg.
\newblock Neural machine translation: A review.
\newblock {\em Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research}, 69:343--418, 2020.
4. Yinhan Liu, Jiatao Gu, Naman Goyal, Xian Li, Sergey Edunov, Marjan Ghazvininejad, Mike Lewis, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
\newblock Multilingual denoising pre-training for neural machine translation.
\newblock {\em Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 8:726--742, 2020.
5. Angela Fan, Shruti Bhosale, Holger Schwenk, Zhiyi Ma, Ahmed El-Kishky, Siddharth Goyal, Mandeep Baines, Onur Celebi, Guillaume Wenzek, Vishrav Chaudhary, et~al.
\newblock Beyond english-centric multilingual machine translation.
\newblock {\em The Journal of Machine Learning Research}, 22(1):4839--4886, 2021.
6. Marta~R Costa-juss{\`a}, James Cross, Onur {\c{C}}elebi, Maha Elbayad, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Heffernan, Elahe Kalbassi, Janice Lam, Daniel Licht, Jean Maillard, et~al.
\newblock No language left behind: Scaling human-centered machine translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04672}, 2022. [arXiv:2207.04672](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.04672)
7. Ye~Jia, Ron~J Weiss, Fadi Biadsy, Wolfgang Macherey, Melvin Johnson, Zhifeng Chen, and Yonghui Wu.
\newblock Direct speech-to-speech translation with a sequence-to-sequence model.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.06037}, 2019. [arXiv:1904.06037](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.06037)
8. Ann Lee, Peng-Jen Chen, Changhan Wang, Jiatao Gu, Sravya Popuri, Xutai Ma, Adam Polyak, Yossi Adi, Qing He, Yun Tang, et~al.
\newblock Direct speech-to-speech translation with discrete units.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.05604}, 2021. [arXiv:2107.05604](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.05604)
9. Ann Lee, Hongyu Gong, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Holger Schwenk, Peng-Jen Chen, Changhan Wang, Sravya Popuri, Yossi Adi, Juan Pino, Jiatao Gu, et~al.
\newblock Textless speech-to-speech translation on real data.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08352}, 2021. [arXiv:2112.08352](https://arxiv.org/abs/2112.08352)
10. Hirofumi Inaguma, Sravya Popuri, Ilia Kulikov, Peng-Jen Chen, Changhan Wang, Yu-An Chung, Yun Tang, Ann Lee, Shinji Watanabe, and Juan Pino.
\newblock Unity: Two-pass direct speech-to-speech translation with discrete units.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08055}, 2022. [arXiv:2212.08055](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.08055)
11. Minsu Kim, Jeongsoo Choi, Dahun Kim, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Many-to-many spoken language translation via unified speech and text representation learning with unit-to-unit translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01831}, 2023. [arXiv:2308.01831](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.01831)
12. Lo{\"\i}c Barrault, Yu-An Chung, Mariano~Cora Meglioli, David Dale, Ning Dong, Paul-Ambroise Duquenne, Hady Elsahar, Hongyu Gong, Kevin Heffernan, John Hoffman, et~al.
\newblock Seamlessm4t-massively multilingual \& multimodal machine translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.11596}, 2023. [arXiv:2308.11596](https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.11596)
13. Harry McGurk and John MacDonald.
\newblock Hearing lips and seeing voices.
\newblock {\em Nature}, 264(5588):746--748, 1976.
14. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lip reading in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Computer Vision--ACCV 2016: 13th Asian Conference on Computer Vision, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers, Part II 13}, pages 87--103. Springer, 2017.
15. Prottay~Kumar Adhikary, Bandaru Sugandhi, Subhojit Ghimire, Santanu Pal, and Partha Pakray.
\newblock Travid: An end-to-end video translation framework.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11338}, 2023. [arXiv:2309.11338](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.11338)
16. Anusha Prakash, Arun Kumar, Ashish Seth, Bhagyashree Mukherjee, Ishika Gupta, Jom Kuriakose, Jordan Fernandes, KV~Vikram, Metilda~Sagaya Mary, Mohammad Wajahat, et~al.
\newblock Technology pipeline for large scale cross-lingual dubbing of lecture videos into multiple indian languages.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.01338}, 2022. [arXiv:2211.01338](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.01338)
17. Alexander Waibel, Moritz Behr, Dogucan Yaman, Fevziye~Irem Eyiokur, Tuan-Nam Nguyen, Carlos Mullov, Mehmet~Arif Demirtas, Alperen Kantarci, Stefan Constantin, and Hazim~Kemal Ekenel.
\newblock Face-dubbing++: Lip-synchronous, voice preserving translation of videos.
\newblock In {\em 2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing Workshops (ICASSPW)}, pages 1--5. IEEE, 2023.
18. Aaditya Barve, Yashodhan Ghule, Pratham Madhani, Purva Potdukhe, and Krunal Pawar.
\newblock Multi-language audio-visual content generation based on generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In {\em 2023 IEEE World Conference on Applied Intelligence and Computing (AIC)}, pages 33--38. IEEE, 2023.
19. Prajwal KR, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Jerin Philip, Abhishek Jha, Vinay Namboodiri, and CV~Jawahar.
\newblock Towards automatic face-to-face translation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 27th ACM international conference on multimedia}, pages 1428--1436, 2019.
20. Dario Amodei, Sundaram Ananthanarayanan, Rishita Anubhai, Jingliang Bai, Eric Battenberg, Carl Case, Jared Casper, Bryan Catanzaro, Qiang Cheng, Guoliang Chen, et~al.
\newblock Deep speech 2: End-to-end speech recognition in english and mandarin.
\newblock In {\em International conference on machine learning}, pages 173--182. PMLR, 2016.
21. Pengcheng Guo, Florian Boyer, Xuankai Chang, Tomoki Hayashi, Yosuke Higuchi, Hirofumi Inaguma, Naoyuki Kamo, Chenda Li, Daniel Garcia-Romero, Jiatong Shi, et~al.
\newblock Recent developments on espnet toolkit boosted by conformer.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 5874--5878. IEEE, 2021.
22. Minsu Kim, Jeong~Hun Yeo, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Distinguishing homophenes using multi-head visual-audio memory for lip reading.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence}, volume~36, pages 1174--1182, 2022.
23. Ngoc-Quan Pham, Thanh-Le Ha, Tuan-Nam Nguyen, Thai-Son Nguyen, Elizabeth Salesky, Sebastian St{\"u}ker, Jan Niehues, and Alexander Waibel.
\newblock Relative positional encoding for speech recognition and direct translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.09940}, 2020. [arXiv:2005.09940](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.09940)
24. Wei Ping, Kainan Peng, Andrew Gibiansky, Sercan~O Arik, Ajay Kannan, Sharan Narang, Jonathan Raiman, and John Miller.
\newblock Deep voice 3: Scaling text-to-speech with convolutional sequence learning.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.07654}, 2017. [arXiv:1710.07654](https://arxiv.org/abs/1710.07654)
25. Yi~Ren, Chenxu Hu, Xu~Tan, Tao Qin, Sheng Zhao, Zhou Zhao, and Tie-Yan Liu.
\newblock Fastspeech 2: Fast and high-quality end-to-end text to speech.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.04558}, 2020. [arXiv:2006.04558](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.04558)
26. Yihan Wu, Xu~Tan, Bohan Li, Lei He, Sheng Zhao, Ruihua Song, Tao Qin, and Tie-Yan Liu.
\newblock Adaspeech 4: Adaptive text to speech in zero-shot scenarios.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2022}, 2022.
27. KR~Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV~Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
28. Se~Jin Park, Minsu Kim, Joanna Hong, Jeongsoo Choi, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Synctalkface: Talking face generation with precise lip-syncing via audio-lip memory.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence}, volume~36, pages 2062--2070, 2022.
29. Marta Ba{\~n}{\'o}n, Pinzhen Chen, Barry Haddow, Kenneth Heafield, Hieu Hoang, Miquel Espl{\`a}-Gomis, Mikel~L Forcada, Amir Kamran, Faheem Kirefu, Philipp Koehn, et~al.
\newblock Paracrawl: Web-scale acquisition of parallel corpora.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, pages 4555--4567, 2020.
30. Akhbardeh Farhad, Arkhangorodsky Arkady, Biesialska Magdalena, Bojar Ond{\v{r}}ej, Chatterjee Rajen, Chaudhary Vishrav, Marta~R Costa-jussa, Espa{\~n}a-Bonet Cristina, Fan Angela, Federmann Christian, et~al.
\newblock Findings of the 2021 conference on machine translation (wmt21).
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on Machine Translation}, pages 1--88. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2021.
31. Naman Goyal, Cynthia Gao, Vishrav Chaudhary, Peng-Jen Chen, Guillaume Wenzek, Da~Ju, Sanjana Krishnan, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, Francisco Guzm{\'a}n, and Angela Fan.
\newblock The flores-101 evaluation benchmark for low-resource and multilingual machine translation.
\newblock {\em Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 10:522--538, 2022.
32. Gowtham Ramesh, Sumanth Doddapaneni, Aravinth Bheemaraj, Mayank Jobanputra, Raghavan Ak, Ajitesh Sharma, Sujit Sahoo, Harshita Diddee, Divyanshu Kakwani, Navneet Kumar, et~al.
\newblock Samanantar: The largest publicly available parallel corpora collection for 11 indic languages.
\newblock {\em Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 10:145--162, 2022.
33. Mohamed Anwar, Bowen Shi, Vedanuj Goswami, Wei-Ning Hsu, Juan Pino, and Changhan Wang.
\newblock Muavic: A multilingual audio-visual corpus for robust speech recognition and robust speech-to-text translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00628}, 2023. [arXiv:2303.00628](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.00628)
34. Changhan Wang, Anne Wu, and Juan Pino.
\newblock Covost 2 and massively multilingual speech-to-text translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.10310}, 2020. [arXiv:2007.10310](https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.10310)
35. Changhan Wang, Morgane Riviere, Ann Lee, Anne Wu, Chaitanya Talnikar, Daniel Haziza, Mary Williamson, Juan Pino, and Emmanuel Dupoux.
\newblock Voxpopuli: A large-scale multilingual speech corpus for representation learning, semi-supervised learning and interpretation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00390}, 2021. [arXiv:2101.00390](https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.00390)
36. Javier Iranzo-S{\'a}nchez, Joan~Albert Silvestre-Cerda, Javier Jorge, Nahuel Rosell{\'o}, Adria Gim{\'e}nez, Albert Sanchis, Jorge Civera, and Alfons Juan.
\newblock Europarl-st: A multilingual corpus for speech translation of parliamentary debates.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2020-2020 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 8229--8233. IEEE, 2020.
37. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and Ilya Sutskever.
\newblock Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages 28492--28518. PMLR, 2023.
38. Mattia~A Di~Gangi, Matteo Negri, and Marco Turchi.
\newblock One-to-many multilingual end-to-end speech translation.
\newblock In {\em 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU)}, pages 585--592. IEEE, 2019.
39. Hirofumi Inaguma, Kevin Duh, Tatsuya Kawahara, and Shinji Watanabe.
\newblock Multilingual end-to-end speech translation.
\newblock In {\em 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU)}, pages 570--577. IEEE, 2019.
40. Xian Li, Changhan Wang, Yun Tang, Chau Tran, Yuqing Tang, Juan Pino, Alexei Baevski, Alexis Conneau, and Michael Auli.
\newblock Multilingual speech translation with efficient finetuning of pretrained models.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.12829}, 2020. [arXiv:2010.12829](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.12829)
41. Andros Tjandra, Sakriani Sakti, and Satoshi Nakamura.
\newblock Speech-to-speech translation between untranscribed unknown languages.
\newblock In {\em 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU)}, pages 593--600. IEEE, 2019.
42. Ye~Jia, Michelle~Tadmor Ramanovich, Tal Remez, and Roi Pomerantz.
\newblock Translatotron 2: High-quality direct speech-to-speech translation with voice preservation.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages 10120--10134. PMLR, 2022.
43. Sravya Popuri, Peng-Jen Chen, Changhan Wang, Juan Pino, Yossi Adi, Jiatao Gu, Wei-Ning Hsu, and Ann Lee.
\newblock Enhanced direct speech-to-speech translation using self-supervised pre-training and data augmentation.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech}, 2022.
44. Yuxuan Wang, RJ~Skerry-Ryan, Daisy Stanton, Yonghui Wu, Ron~J Weiss, Navdeep Jaitly, Zongheng Yang, Ying Xiao, Zhifeng Chen, Samy Bengio, et~al.
\newblock Tacotron: Towards end-to-end speech synthesis.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2017}. ISCA, 2017.
45. Florian Lux and Thang Vu.
\newblock Language-agnostic meta-learning for low-resource text-to-speech with articulatory features.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)}, pages 6858--6868, 2022.
46. Edresson Casanova, Julian Weber, Christopher~D Shulby, Arnaldo~Candido Junior, Eren G{\"o}lge, and Moacir~A Ponti.
\newblock Yourtts: Towards zero-shot multi-speaker tts and zero-shot voice conversion for everyone.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages 2709--2720. PMLR, 2022.
47. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu~Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 3661--3670, 2021.
48. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 4176--4186, 2021.
49. Wenxuan Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Xuan Wang, Yong Zhang, Xi~Shen, Yu~Guo, Ying Shan, and Fei Wang.
\newblock Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 8652--8661, 2023.
50. Sahibzada~Adil Shahzad, Ammarah Hashmi, Sarwar Khan, Yan-Tsung Peng, Yu~Tsao, and Hsin-Min Wang.
\newblock Lip sync matters: A novel multimodal forgery detector.
\newblock In {\em 2022 Asia-Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association Annual Summit and Conference (APSIPA ASC)}, pages 1885--1892. IEEE, 2022.
51. Yipin Zhou and Ser-Nam Lim.
\newblock Joint audio-visual deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 14800--14809, 2021.
52. Bowen Shi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Kushal Lakhotia, and Abdelrahman Mohamed.
\newblock Learning audio-visual speech representation by masked multimodal cluster prediction.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2021.
53. Wei-Ning Hsu and Bowen Shi.
\newblock u-hubert: Unified mixed-modal speech pretraining and zero-shot transfer to unlabeled modality.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 35:21157--21170, 2022.
54. Xize Cheng, Tao Jin, Rongjie Huang, Linjun Li, Wang Lin, Zehan Wang, Ye~Wang, Huadai Liu, Aoxiong Yin, and Zhou Zhao.
\newblock Mixspeech: Cross-modality self-learning with audio-visual stream mixup for visual speech translation and recognition.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 15735--15745, 2023.
55. Xize Cheng, Tao Jin, Linjun Li, Wang Lin, Xinyu Duan, and Zhou Zhao.
\newblock {O}pen{SR}: Open-modality speech recognition via maintaining multi-modality alignment.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers)}, 2023.
56. Kushal Lakhotia, Eugene Kharitonov, Wei-Ning Hsu, Yossi Adi, Adam Polyak, Benjamin Bolte, Tu-Anh Nguyen, Jade Copet, Alexei Baevski, Abdelrahman Mohamed, et~al.
\newblock On generative spoken language modeling from raw audio.
\newblock {\em Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 9:1336--1354, 2021.
57. Alon Lavie, Alex Waibel, Lori Levin, Michael Finke, Donna Gates, Marsal Gavalda, Torsten Zeppenfeld, and Puming Zhan.
\newblock Janus-iii: Speech-to-speech translation in multiple languages.
\newblock In {\em 1997 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing}, volume~1, pages 99--102. IEEE, 1997.
58. Satoshi Nakamura, Konstantin Markov, Hiromi Nakaiwa, Gen-ichiro Kikui, Hisashi Kawai, Takatoshi Jitsuhiro, J-S Zhang, Hirofumi Yamamoto, Eiichiro Sumita, and Seiichi Yamamoto.
\newblock The atr multilingual speech-to-speech translation system.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, 14(2):365--376, 2006.
59. Wolfgang Wahlster.
\newblock {\em Verbmobil: foundations of speech-to-speech translation}.
\newblock Springer Science \& Business Media, 2013.
60. Ye~Jia, Melvin Johnson, Wolfgang Macherey, Ron~J Weiss, Yuan Cao, Chung-Cheng Chiu, Naveen Ari, Stella Laurenzo, and Yonghui Wu.
\newblock Leveraging weakly supervised data to improve end-to-end speech-to-text translation.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2019-2019 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 7180--7184. IEEE, 2019.
61. Rongjie Huang, Jinglin Liu, Huadai Liu, Yi~Ren, Lichao Zhang, Jinzheng He, and Zhou Zhao.
\newblock Transpeech: Speech-to-speech translation with bilateral perturbation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12523}, 2022. [arXiv:2205.12523](https://arxiv.org/abs/2205.12523)
62. Rongjie Huang, Huadai Liu, Xize Cheng, Yi~Ren, Linjun Li, Zhenhui Ye, Jinzheng He, Lichao Zhang, Jinglin Liu, Xiang Yin, et~al.
\newblock Av-transpeech: Audio-visual robust speech-to-speech translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15403}, 2023. [arXiv:2305.15403](./2305.15403.md)
63. Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon~Son Chung, Andrew Senior, Oriol Vinyals, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Deep audio-visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence}, 44(12):8717--8727, 2018.
64. Pingchuan Ma, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock End-to-end audio-visual speech recognition with conformers.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 7613--7617. IEEE, 2021.
65. Joanna Hong, Minsu Kim, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Visual context-driven audio feature enhancement for robust end-to-end audio-visual speech recognition.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2022}. International Speech Communication Association, 2022.
66. Joanna Hong, Minsu Kim, Jeongsoo Choi, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Watch or listen: Robust audio-visual speech recognition with visual corruption modeling and reliability scoring.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 18783--18794, 2023.
67. Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung~Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and Abdelrahman Mohamed.
\newblock Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked prediction of hidden units.
\newblock {\em IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, 29:3451--3460, 2021.
68. Steffen Schneider, Alexei Baevski, Ronan Collobert, and Michael Auli.
\newblock wav2vec: Unsupervised pre-training for speech recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.05862}, 2019. [arXiv:1904.05862](https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05862)
69. Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli.
\newblock wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 33:12449--12460, 2020.
70. Yu-An Chung, Yu~Zhang, Wei Han, Chung-Cheng Chiu, James Qin, Ruoming Pang, and Yonghui Wu.
\newblock W2v-bert: Combining contrastive learning and masked language modeling for self-supervised speech pre-training.
\newblock In {\em 2021 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU)}, pages 244--250. IEEE, 2021.
71. Arun Babu, Changhan Wang, Andros Tjandra, Kushal Lakhotia, Qiantong Xu, Naman Goyal, Kritika Singh, Patrick von Platen, Yatharth Saraf, Juan Pino, et~al.
\newblock Xls-r: Self-supervised cross-lingual speech representation learning at scale.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.09296}, 2021. [arXiv:2111.09296](https://arxiv.org/abs/2111.09296)
72. Sanyuan Chen, Chengyi Wang, Zhengyang Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Jinyu Li, Naoyuki Kanda, Takuya Yoshioka, Xiong Xiao, et~al.
\newblock Wavlm: Large-scale self-supervised pre-training for full stack speech processing.
\newblock {\em IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal Processing}, 16(6):1505--1518, 2022.
73. Junyi Ao, Rui Wang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Shuo Ren, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Tom Ko, Qing Li, Yu~Zhang, et~al.
\newblock Speecht5: Unified-modal encoder-decoder pre-training for spoken language processing.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.07205}, 2021. [arXiv:2110.07205](https://arxiv.org/abs/2110.07205)
74. Ye~Jia, Yifan Ding, Ankur Bapna, Colin Cherry, Yu~Zhang, Alexis Conneau, and Nobuyuki Morioka.
\newblock Leveraging unsupervised and weakly-supervised data to improve direct speech-to-speech translation.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2022}, 2022.
75. Xuankai Chang, Brian Yan, Yuya Fujita, Takashi Maekaku, and Shinji Watanabe.
\newblock Exploration of efficient end-to-end asr using discretized input from self-supervised learning.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2023}, 2023.
76. Xuankai Chang, Brian Yan, Kwanghee Choi, Jeeweon Jung, Yichen Lu, Soumi Maiti, Roshan Sharma, Jiatong Shi, Jinchuan Tian, Shinji Watanabe, et~al.
\newblock Exploring speech recognition, translation, and understanding with discrete speech units: A comparative study.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15800}, 2023. [arXiv:2309.15800](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15800)
77. Soumi Maiti, Yifan Peng, Shukjae Choi, Jee-weon Jung, Xuankai Chang, and Shinji Watanabe.
\newblock Voxtlm: unified decoder-only models for consolidating speech recognition/synthesis and speech/text continuation tasks.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.07937}, 2023. [arXiv:2309.07937](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.07937)
78. Minsu Kim, Jeongsoo Choi, Soumi Maiti, Jeong~Hun Yeo, Shinji Watanabe, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Towards practical and efficient image-to-speech captioning with vision-language pre-training and multi-modal tokens.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08531}, 2023. [arXiv:2309.08531](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.08531)
79. Tu~Anh Nguyen, Eugene Kharitonov, Jade Copet, Yossi Adi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Ali Elkahky, Paden Tomasello, Robin Algayres, Benoit Sagot, Abdelrahman Mohamed, et~al.
\newblock Generative spoken dialogue language modeling.
\newblock {\em Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, 11:250--266, 2023.
80. Alexandros Haliassos, Pingchuan Ma, Rodrigo Mira, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Jointly learning visual and auditory speech representations from raw data.
\newblock In {\em The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2022.
81. Qiushi Zhu, Long Zhou, Ziqiang Zhang, Shujie Liu, Binxing Jiao, Jie Zhang, Lirong Dai, Daxin Jiang, Jinyu Li, and Furu Wei.
\newblock Vatlm: Visual-audio-text pre-training with unified masked prediction for speech representation learning.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, 2023.
82. Minsu Kim, Jeong~Hun Yeo, Jeongsoo Choi, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Lip reading for low-resource languages by learning and combining general speech knowledge and language-specific knowledge.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 15359--15371, 2023.
83. Bowen Shi, Wei-Ning Hsu, and Abdelrahman Mohamed.
\newblock Robust self-supervised audio-visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.01763}, 2022. [arXiv:2201.01763](https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.01763)
84. Wei-Ning Hsu, Tal Remez, Bowen Shi, Jacob Donley, and Yossi Adi.
\newblock Revise: Self-supervised speech resynthesis with visual input for universal and generalized speech regeneration.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 18795--18805, 2023.
85. Jeongsoo Choi, Minsu Kim, and Yong~Man Ro.
\newblock Intelligible lip-to-speech synthesis with speech units.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2023}, 2023.
86. Joon~Son Chung, Andrew Senior, Oriol Vinyals, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lip reading sentences in the wild.
\newblock In {\em 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 3444--3453. IEEE, 2017.
87. Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lrs3-ted: a large-scale dataset for visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00496}, 2018. [arXiv:1809.00496](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00496)
88. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}, 2018. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
89. Elizabeth Salesky, Matthew Wiesner, Jacob Bremerman, Roldano Cattoni, Matteo Negri, Marco Turchi, Douglas~W Oard, and Matt Post.
\newblock The multilingual tedx corpus for speech recognition and translation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01757}, 2021. [arXiv:2102.01757](https://arxiv.org/abs/2102.01757)
90. Ariel Ephrat, Inbar Mosseri, Oran Lang, Tali Dekel, Kevin Wilson, Avinatan Hassidim, William~T Freeman, and Michael Rubinstein.
\newblock Looking to listen at the cocktail party: A speaker-independent audio-visual model for speech separation.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.03619}, 2018. [arXiv:1804.03619](https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.03619)
91. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan~N Gomez, {\L}ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.
\newblock Attention is all you need.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
92. Jungil Kong, Jaehyeon Kim, and Jaekyoung Bae.
\newblock Hifi-gan: Generative adversarial networks for efficient and high fidelity speech synthesis.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 33:17022--17033, 2020.
93. Jee-weon Jung, Hee-Soo Heo, Ju-ho Kim, Hye-jin Shim, and Ha-Jin Yu.
\newblock Rawnet: Advanced end-to-end deep neural network using raw waveforms for text-independent speaker verification.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2019}, 2019.
94. Brecht Desplanques, Jenthe Thienpondt, and Kris Demuynck.
\newblock Ecapa-tdnn: Emphasized channel attention, propagation and aggregation in tdnn based speaker verification.
\newblock In {\em Proc. Interspeech 2020}, 2020.
95. Li~Wan, Quan Wang, Alan Papir, and Ignacio~Lopez Moreno.
\newblock Generalized end-to-end loss for speaker verification.
\newblock In {\em 2018 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 4879--4883. IEEE, 2018.
96. Ye~Jia, Yu~Zhang, Ron Weiss, Quan Wang, Jonathan Shen, Fei Ren, Patrick Nguyen, Ruoming Pang, Ignacio Lopez~Moreno, Yonghui Wu, et~al.
\newblock Transfer learning from speaker verification to multispeaker text-to-speech synthesis.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 31, 2018.
97. Ehsan Variani, Xin Lei, Erik McDermott, Ignacio~Lopez Moreno, and Javier Gonzalez-Dominguez.
\newblock Deep neural networks for small footprint text-dependent speaker verification.
\newblock In {\em 2014 IEEE international conference on acoustics, speech and signal processing (ICASSP)}, pages 4052--4056. IEEE, 2014.
98. Jaehyeon Kim, Jungil Kong, and Juhee Son.
\newblock Conditional variational autoencoder with adversarial learning for end-to-end text-to-speech.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages 5530--5540. PMLR, 2021.
99. Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu.
\newblock Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics}, pages 311--318, 2002.
100. Matt Post.
\newblock A call for clarity in reporting bleu scores.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers}, page 186. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018.
101. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium.
\newblock {\em Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
102. Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Evangelos Ververas, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
\newblock Retinaface: Single-shot multi-level face localisation in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 5203--5212, 2020.
103. Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock How far are we from solving the 2d \& 3d face alignment problem? (and a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks).
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Computer Vision}, 2017.
104. David Snyder, Guoguo Chen, and Daniel Povey.
\newblock Musan: A music, speech, and noise corpus.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1510.08484}, 2015. [arXiv:1510.08484](https://arxiv.org/abs/1510.08484)
105. Coqui.
\newblock Xtts: Open model release announcement.
\newblock URL \url{https://coqui.ai/blog/tts/open_xtts}, 2023.
106. Ziqiang Zhang, Long Zhou, Chengyi Wang, Sanyuan Chen, Yu~Wu, Shujie Liu, Zhuo Chen, Yanqing Liu, Huaming Wang, Jinyu Li, et~al.
\newblock Speak foreign languages with your own voice: Cross-lingual neural codec language modeling.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.03926}, 2023. [arXiv:2303.03926](https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.03926)
107. Pingchuan Ma, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Visual speech recognition for multiple languages in the wild.
\newblock {\em Nature Machine Intelligence}, 4(11):930--939, 2022.
108. Xintao Wang, Yu~Li, Honglun Zhang, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Towards real-world blind face restoration with generative facial prior.
\newblock In {\em The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, 2021.
