---
arxiv_id: s2:5d082bc5968b7138509758f88069288076227d42
title: 'LipNeRF: What is the right feature space to lip-sync a NeRF?'
authors:
- Aggelina Chatziagapi
- ShahRukh Athar
- Abhinav Jain
- M. Rohith
- Vimal Bhat
- D. Samaras
submitted: '2023-01-05'
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://www.semanticscholar.org/paper/5d082bc5968b7138509758f88069288076227d42
source: metadata-only
converter: none
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 0/0
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:24:26+00:00'
references_parsed: 0
arxiv_version: ''
---

## Abstract

Synthesizing high-fidelity talking head videos of an arbitrary identity, lip-synced to a target speech segment, is a challenging problem. Recent GAN-based methods succeed by training a model on a large amount of videos, allowing the generator to learn a variety of audio-lip representations. However, they are unable to handle head pose changes. On the other hand, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) model the 3D face geometry more accurately. Current audio-conditioned NeRFs are not as good in lip synchronization as GANs, since they are trained on limited video data of a single identity. In this work, we propose LipNeRF, a lip-syncing NeRF that bridges the gap between the accurate lip synchronization of GAN-based methods and the accurate 3D face modeling of NeRFs. LipNeRF is conditioned on the expression space of a 3DMM, instead of the audio feature space. We experimentally demonstrate that the expression space gives a better representation for the lip shape than the audio feature space. LipNeRF shows a significant improvement in lip-sync quality over the current state-of-the-art, especially in high-definition videos of cinematic content, with challenging pose, illumination and expression variations.
