---
arxiv_id: '2503.18429'
title: 'Teller: Real-Time Streaming Audio-Driven Portrait Animation with Autoregressive
  Motion Generation'
authors:
- Dingcheng Zhen
- Shunshun Yin
- Shiyang Qin
- Hou Yi
- Ziwei Zhang
- Siyuan Liu
- Gan Qi
- Ming Tao
submitted: '2025-03-24'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.18429
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 22/51
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:15:23+00:00'
references_parsed: 51
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Realistic and expressive portrait animation from audio and static images, commonly known as talking head animation , has garnered significant interest across applications such as virtual avatars, digital communication, and entertainment. However, generating high-quality animations that are visually compelling and temporally consistent remains a major challenge. This complexity stems from the need to intricately coordinate lip movements, facial expressions, and head positioning to create lifelike effects. Moreover, achieving real-time, realistic talking head animation is complicated by computational constraints and the nuances of human movement, making this an especially demanding task.

While recent advancements, such as diffusion models , have improved high-quality content generation, achieving controllable animation presents ongoing hurdles. Effective animation requires the accurate capture of complex facial expressions, body gestures, and the subtle interplay between them. Existing methods often suffer from prolonged animation times (See animation time in Tab <a href="#tab:HDTF" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:HDTF">[tab:HDTF]</a>), limiting their potential for real-time applications, and frequently fail to capture the natural, interconnected motions of various facial and body parts, , earrings and necklaces, as shown in Figure. <a href="#fig:Teaser_figure" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Teaser_figure">[fig:Teaser_figure]</a> stage 2. This shortfall results in animations with stiff or exaggerated movements that disrupt the realism of the animation (See Figure <a href="#fig:movements" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:movements">6</a>). Addressing these challenges necessitates a solution that balances computational efficiency with high animation quality without overloading processing resources.

To this end, we propose **Teller**, the **first** autoregressive framework capable of real-time, streaming-based talking head animation at up to 25 FPS. As shown in Figure. <a href="#fig:overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:overall">1</a>, Teller employs a two-stage framework, combining **F**acial **M**otion **L**atent **G**eneration (**FMLG**) and an **E**fficient **T**emporal **M**odule (**ETM**) to produce realistic and physically consistent animations across facial and body movements. In the first stage, FMLG uses a Residual Vector Quantization (RVQ) model  to encode facial motion latents derived from an implicit keypoint-based model into discrete motion tokens. These tokens are then temporally aligned with audio embeddings, allowing an autoregressive (AR) transformer to map audio signals to facial movements in real-time. By breaking down the motion into temporal segments, FMLG enables the AR transformer to dynamically and efficiently generate high-quality animations responsive to live audio inputs.

To enhance the realism of body movements, Teller introduces ETM in the second stage, which captures subtle details that are often overlooked in existing methods . The ETM refines finer movements, such as body parts and accessories, ensuring physically plausible interactions. For instance, it simulates realistic motions in neck muscles and dynamic accessories like earrings, which are vital for maintaining visual continuity in the animated avatar. Our Teller model prioritizes computational efficiency and is specifically designed to significantly outperform diffusion-based models in terms of inference speed. For example, generating a one-second video takes Hallo **20.93s**, while Teller completes the task in just **<span style="color: red">0.92s</span>** (see Tab. <a href="#tab:HDTF" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:HDTF">[tab:HDTF]</a>). Despite this speed, Teller maintains high animation fidelity. By optimizing computational demands without compromising output quality, Teller not only meets but exceeds real-time requirements, ensuring a smooth and responsive user experience.

In extensive evaluations across various benchmarks and real-world settings, Teller demonstrates significant improvements over current state-of-the-art audio-driven portrait animation models, as shown in Table. <a href="#tab:HDTF" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:HDTF">[tab:HDTF]</a>, particularly in capturing nuanced facial and body movements. Human evaluations validate Teller’s superior quality and realism, especially in rendering the subtle movements essential for lifelike animations. Our research represents a notable advancement in real-time talking head animation, presenting an innovative framework that bridges the gap between realism and efficiency in multimodal animation, as depicted in Figure. <a href="#fig:sample_diversity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:sample_diversity">5</a>, Figure. <a href="#fig:movements" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:movements">6</a>, and Figure. <a href="#fig:Lip_acc" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Lip_acc">7</a>.

<figure id="fig:overall" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/overall2.pdf" style="width:99.0%" />
<figcaption>Overall framework of our proposed Teller for real-time streaming audio-driven portrait animation.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Related Works

**Non-Diffusion-Based Audio-Driven Portrait Animation** This line of works typically consist of two key components: an audio-to-motion model and a facial motion representation model. These methods often utilize implicit keypoints as an intermediate motion representation, warping the source portrait based on the driving image. The goal of implicit methods is to learn disentangled representations in 2D or 3D  latent spaces, with a focus on aspects such as identity, facial dynamics, and head pose. For example, FOMM  employs first-order Taylor expansion to capture local motion, while FaceVid2Vid  extends this by introducing a 3D implicit keypoint representation, enabling free-view portrait animation.

To effectively learn facial motion representations in latent space, these approaches often rely on GAN-based frameworks to disentangle identity-related appearance from non-identity-related motion, specifically capturing expressions, lip and eye movements, minor accessories, and poses. Examples include FaceVid2Vid , LivePortrait , and others, where identity and motion representations are independently learned to generate realistic talking head animations. For instance, MakeItTalk  uses an LSTM-based audio-to-motion model to predict landmark coordinates from audio input, which are then translated into video frames using a warp-based GAN model. Similarly, SadTalker  employs FaceVid2Vid  as an image synthesizer, with ExpNet and PoseVAE modules transforming audio features into inputs compatible with FaceVid2Vid for audio-to-video generation.

However, these approaches face challenges due to GAN losses that primarily focus on facial expressions, lip, and eye movements, often neglecting accessory, hair, and body movements. This can result in animations that appear stiff or incomplete, lacking natural dynamism. In contrast, our work introduces the **first** autoregressive framework specifically designed for real-time, audio-driven portrait animation, achieving up to 25 FPS and delivering a more realistic, coherent portrayal of both facial and accessory movements.

**Diffusion-based Audio-driven Portrait Animation** Recent advancements in diffusion-based video generation have demonstrated promising outcomes for audio-driven portrait animation. Methods like GAIA  and VASA-1  have designed diffusion models to transform audio inputs into motion latents, facilitating audio-to-video generation. Further developments, such as EMO, Hallo , LOOPY , enhance end-to-end diffusion modeling by incorporating motion modules  and audio cross-attention mechanisms, improving the coherence and synchronization between audio cues and visual motion. Despite these improvements, a significant limitation of diffusion-based models remains their multi-step inference process, required to generate even a single frame or a few frames of video. This step-by-step prediction approach renders real-time performance challenging, as it is computationally intensive and time-consuming, making diffusion-based models less suitable for applications demanding instantaneous response.

**AR Transformer-Based Generation** Recent works  have focused on developing unified multimodal language models for generating visual content, such as images and videos. Some studies  use autoregressive modeling with continuous representations interleaved with text tokens for image generation. Others, like SEED-X , propose a foundational system combining CLIP ViT-based image representations with text tokens for multimodal tasks, including next-token prediction and image representation regression. DreamLLM  also explores multimodal understanding and creation, while Chameleon  introduces token-based models capable of both understanding and generating images.

# Method

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:overall">1</a>, Teller comprises two main modules: the Facial Motion Latent Generation (**FMLG**) and the Efficient Temporal Module (**ETM**). FMLG module integrates an autoregressive transformer and a residual vector quantization (RVQ) component. It applies an autoregressive transformer to generate discrete facial motion tokens from audio input. Following FMLG, ETM refines the generated motion to produce realistic body and accessory movements, ensuring physical consistency in animated results.

## Preliminaries

Prior works, such as LivePortrait  have introduced methods for extracting implicit keypoints as facial motion latents using motion and appearance extractors. These motion latents capture essential facial dynamics needed for animating input images and consist of three main components:

- **Expression Deformation** ($`\delta`$): A set deformation of 21 implicit keypoints, represented as $`{\delta} = [{\delta}_1, {\delta}_2, \dots, {\delta}_{21}]`$, where each $`{\delta}`$ is a 3D vector ($`\mathbb{R}^3`$) that indicates the position of the $`i`$-th deformation of facial keypoint.

- **Head Pose** ($`R`$): Defined by three rotation vectors $`R = [r_1, r_2, r_3]`$, with each $`r_i`$ being a 3D vector ($`\mathbb{R}^3`$) that describes the head’s orientation in 3D space.

- **Expression Deformation** ($`t`$): A single 3D vector ($`t \in \mathbb{R}^3`$) that captures facial expression deformations.

These components are concatenated into a unified motion latent of size $`25 \times 3`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
 m = [{\delta}_1,{\delta}_2, \dots, {\delta}_{21}, r_1, r_2, r_3, t],
\end{equation}
```
where $`m \in \mathbb{R}^{25 \times 3}`$ includes the 21 keypoints, head pose, and expression deformation.

## Facial Motion Latent Generation (FMLG)

In FMLG, Teller generates motion latent from facial motion extraction, then encodes it into discrete tokens using a residual vector quantizer (RVQ). To optimize encoding, the concatenated motion latent $`m`$ is processed with RVQ, leveraging temporal redundancy across $`T`$ frames for efficient compression. The RVQ quantization loss, which encodes the continuous $`m`$ into discrete tokens, is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
\small
  \mathcal{L}_{vq} = \sum_{t=1}^{T} \left[
\underbrace{||m - \text{FFN}_{dec}(z_t + \text{sg}[\hat{z_t} - z_t])||_2^2}_{\mathcal{L}_{\text{recon}}} + 
\underbrace{||z_t - \text{sg}[\hat{z_t}]||_2^2}_{\mathcal{L}_{\text{commit}}} 
\right]
\end{equation}
```
where $`z_t = \text{FFN}_{enc}(m)`$ represents the encoded latent at each time step $`t`$, $`\hat{z_t}`$ is the quantized latent, and $`\text{sg}`$ denotes the stop-gradient operation. The two loss components, $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{recon}}`$ and $`\mathcal{L}_{\text{commit}}`$, are defined as follows:

- **Reconstruction Loss** ($`\mathcal{L}_{\text{recon}}`$): Minimizes the difference between the original motion latent $`m`$ and the decoded quantized latent.

- **Commitment Loss** ($`\mathcal{L}_{\text{commit}}`$): Encourages $`z_t`$ to approach the quantized latent $`\hat{z_t}`$, ensuring stability in quantization.

This approach enables FMLG to learn robust, temporally-consistent representations, translating audio-driven inputs into lifelike facial animations. Experimentally, to achieve trade-offs between frame count and redundancy, we selected 4 frames (4$`\times`$<!-- -->25$`\times`$<!-- -->3 latent) to be compressed into 32 tokens (hyper-parameter selection trade-off refer to Fig. <a href="#fig:VQ_ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:VQ_ablation">10</a>).

<figure id="fig:AR_transformer">
<embed src="images/AR_transformer.pdf" />
<figcaption>In our Teller, we follow AR transformer architecture, but each input consists of a pair of tokens and model pred a pair of tokens for each output position.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:Qualitative_RAVDESS_angry" data-latex-placement="th!">
<embed src="images/Qualitative_RAVDESS.pdf" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparison with existing approaches on RAVDESS data-set of ’angry’ and ’disgust’ emotion cases. <em><strong><span style="color: red">Videos</span> are available in the supplementary materials.</strong></em></figcaption>
</figure>

## AR Transformer for Motion Generation

Using the learned RVQ-based latents, motion is denoted as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
    M = [m_1, m_2, \dots, m_T], \quad \text{where} \quad m_i \in \mathbb{R}^{25 \times 3}.
\end{equation}
```
This sequence of motion latents is converted to discrete tokens using the RVQ module:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
    T_m = [t_1, t_2, \dots, t_{T/4}],
\end{equation}
```
where $`T_m`$ represents the quantized motion tokens. Audio input is encoded with the Whisper encoder , generating the audio condition $`c`$. Motion generation is modeled as a next-token prediction task, where the distribution of each token is predicted based on the previous $`t-1`$ tokens and audio condition $`c`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
    P(t_i \mid c, t_{<i}).
\end{equation}
```
This autoregressive setup enables sequential generation of motion based on past motion tokens and audio embeddings.

To enable real-time streaming animation, we process both audio and video frames in 200ms chunks, following Whisper’s constraints. Each audio chunk is encoded into a $`[10 \times 512]`$ embedding, while each video chunk uses 32 learned RVQ-based motion tokens. For efficient real-time performance, we enable the autoregressive transformer to process token pairs at each position, which improves prediction speed by processing two tokens concurrently. In Teller, each input consists of a token pair with a combined embedding and a learnable position bias inspired by BERT, capturing relative token positions. The loss for each head, representing each token in the pair, is computed as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{head0}_{j}} = \text{CE}(\text{label}_{j}[0], \text{T}(\text{input}_{j}[0] | \text{input}_{<j})),
\end{equation}
```
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{head1}_{j}} = \text{CE}(\text{label}_{j}[1], \text{T}(\text{input}_{j}[1] | \text{input}_{<j})),
\end{equation}
```
where $`T`$ denotes the transformer. The total loss, with a regularization term to balance learning across both heads, is:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
\mathcal{L}_{ar} = \sum_{j=1}^{I/2} \left[ \mathcal{L}_{\text{head0}_{j}} + \mathcal{L}_{\text{head1}_{j}} + \left\|\mathcal{L}_{\text{head0}_{j}} - \mathcal{L}_{\text{head1}_{j}}\right\|_2^2 \right].
\end{equation}
```
This regularization term, $`\left\|\mathcal{L}_{\text{head0}} - \mathcal{L}_{\text{head1}}\right\|_2^2`$, ensures balanced training across the two heads, promoting stable and accurate real-time animation.

After testing frame count and redundancy, we use 4 frames (4$`\times`$<!-- -->25$`\times`$<!-- -->3 latent), compressed into 32 tokens (refer to Fig. <a href="#fig:VQ_ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:VQ_ablation">10</a>). Then the 4 frames are interpolated to 5 frames for faster generation. This setup balances inference efficiency and feature quality, enabling real-time, high-fidelity streaming portrait animation.

## Efficient Temporal Module for Refinement

In diffusion-based models, temporal layers are added to text-to-image (T2I) frameworks to capture frame dependencies . Inspired by this, Teller incorporates temporal refinement but achieves it in a single step, unlike diffusion models that require multiple iterations, enhancing real-time efficiency. After encoding video frames with a VAE encoder, we apply a 3D U-Net  to extract features from the image sequence, represented as $`x \in \mathbb{R}^{b \times t \times h \times w \times c}`$, where $`b`$ is the batch size, $`t`$ the frame count, $`h`$ and $`w`$ the frame dimensions, and $`c`$ the channel count. The features are reshaped to $`x \in \mathbb{R}^{(b \times h \times w) \times t \times c}`$, enabling ETM to perform self-attention along the temporal dimension $`t`$. ETM’s output is then merged with the original features through residual connections, integrating temporal dependencies into spatial features.

For training, we use the first 5 frames from a real image sequence and the subsequent 5 frames reconstructed with LivePortrait . After processing through ETM, we compute reconstruction loss between the predicted and ground-truth frames:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{recon}} = \sum_{i=6}^{10} \left\| x_{\text{gt}_i} - f(x_i | x_{\text{gt}_{<6}}) \right\|_2^2,
\end{equation}
```
where $`x_{\text{gt}_i}`$ denotes the real feature sequence and $`x_i`$ the reconstructed feature sequence (from LivePortrait or the Stage 1 decoder). ETM primarily learns to preserve consistency in physical features such as neck muscles and earrings. To this end, we add a region-specific mask to reconstruction loss, and the final loss of ETM:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{ETM}} = \sum_{i=6}^{10} \left\| x_{\text{gt}_i} \odot \text{mask}_i - f(x_i | x_{\text{gt}_{<6}}) \odot \text{mask}_i \right\|_2^2,
\end{equation}
```
where element-wise multiplication with $`\text{mask}_i`$ focuses reconstruction on specific regions. The mask is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\setlength{\abovedisplayskip}{3pt}
\setlength{\belowdisplayskip}{3pt}
\text{mask}(i, j) = 
  \begin{cases}
    1, & \text{if } (i, j) \text{ is within BB}(x) \\
    0, & \text{otherwise}
  \end{cases}
\end{equation}
```
where BB(x) stands for the bounding box and outlines relevant body parts. Key landmarks are identified using MediaPipe, with points indices such as \[93, 323, 152\] defining the bounding boxes for these regions, highlighted in red in the stage 2 input of Fig. <a href="#fig:overall" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:overall">1</a>.

<figure id="fig:Qualitative_HDTF_Head" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/Qualitative_HDTF_final.pdf" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparison with existing approaches on HDTF dataset. <em><strong><span style="color: red">Videos</span> are available in the supplement. mat.</strong></em></figcaption>
</figure>

# Experiments

## Experimental Setup

**Datasets.** For training, we used the AV Speech datasets (filtered to 662 hours)  and VFHQ  datasets (filtered to 2 hours) for pretraining, along with additional talking-head videos from the internet (32 hours) for supervised fine-tuning (SFT). For validation, we used the HDTF (filtered to 0.83 hours)  and RAVDESS (filtered to 0.55 hours)  datasets and supplementary internet data (0.49 hours) for qualitative comparisons and human evaluation only. To ensure quality, we applied the Mediapipe  face detection tool to filter out instances with facial movement exceeding 50%. We further refined the data using Sync-C and Sync-D to exclude samples with low lip-sync scores.

**Metrics.** Evaluation metrics include Fréchet Inception Distance (FID), Fréchet Video Distance (FVD), Synchronization-C (Sync-C), and Synchronization-D (Sync-D). FID and FVD assess realism, with lower scores indicating better quality, while Sync-C and Sync-D measure lip synchronization, with higher Sync-C and lower Sync-D values indicating better alignment.

**Implementation Details.**

**Stage 1**: During pretraining, we follow the architecture design of the Qwen1.5-4B model  and initialize the parameters randomly. The model is trained on an 8$`\times`$<!-- -->8 Nvidia A800 GPU machine with a batch size of 1024, using the AdamW optimizer . We employ a cosine learning rate scheduler, with the learning rate decaying from 1e-4 to 1e-6 over 40 epochs. In the supervised fine-tuning (SFT) phase, we again use an 8$`\times`$<!-- -->8 Nvidia A800 GPU machine, but with a batch size of 512. The AdamW optimizer  is used, along with a cosine learning rate scheduler. The learning rate decaying from 1e-5 to 1e-6 over 10 epochs. **Stage 2**: The model is trained on an 8$`\times`$<!-- -->8 Nvidia A800 GPU machine, with a batch size of 1024, and using the AdamW optimizer. The cosine learning rate scheduler is used, with the learning rate decaying from 1e-4 to 1e-6 over 30 epochs.

**Real time analysis.** The model is inference on an 4 Nvidia H800 GPU machine. For a 200ms audio input, the average processing time of the Whisper encoder is 7ms. In Stage 1, the average total time is 106ms, with the AR transformer taking an average of 6ms per 16 tokens, and the motion decoder taking an average of 10ms. In Stage 2, the average total time is 71ms, with the VAE encoder and decoder averaging 25ms, and the Temporal Module averaging 21ms.

## Quantitative Results

**Comparison on the HDTF Dataset.** Table <a href="#tab:HDTF" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:HDTF">[tab:HDTF]</a> presents quantitative results for portrait animation techniques on the HDTF dataset. Our method outperforms others, achieving the **lowest** FVD of **173.463** and a competitive FID of **21.352**, indicating high quality and temporal coherence in animated talking heads. Additionally, it achieves the **highest** Sync-C score of **7.696** and the **lowest** Sync-D score of **7.536**, demonstrating excellent lip synchronization. These results highlight Teller’s effectiveness in maintaining both visual fidelity and synchronization.

**Comparison on the RAVDESS Dataset.** Table <a href="#tab:RAVDESS" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:RAVDESS">[tab:RAVDESS]</a> shows quantitative results on the RAVDESS dataset. Our method again leads in performance, with the **lowest** FVD of **429.288** and a competitive FID of **20.352**, reflecting high-quality and temporally coherent animations. The **highest** Sync-C score of **4.496** and a competitive Sync-D score of **7.936** further demonstrate superior lip synchronization. These findings confirm Teller’s strength in producing synchronized and high-fidelity animated portraits.

<figure id="fig:sample_diversity" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/sample_diversity2.pdf" />
<figcaption>Top-k selection (k=15) in FMLG produces diverse facial expressions and actions with accurate lip sync on the HDTF.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:movements" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/movements.pdf" />
<figcaption>Visualization of finer motion details. <em><strong><span style="color: red">Videos</span> are available in the supplementary materials.</strong></em></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:Lip_acc" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/Lip_acc.pdf" />
<figcaption>Visualization of the generation accuracy of lip shape.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:human_eval" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/human_eval.pdf" />
<figcaption>Human evaluation results among our proposed Teller and other SoTA methods.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Qualitative Results

**Head Movement Comparison.** Figure <a href="#fig:Qualitative_HDTF_Head" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Qualitative_HDTF_Head">4</a> shows a qualitative comparison of head movements. Teller replicates natural head movements more accurately, closely matching the ground truth (GT) with smooth, realistic turns and subtle expression-based adjustments. Competing methods, like AniPortrait and EchoMimic, often show abrupt or limited movements, appearing rigid or lifeless. Teller’s autoregressive framework ensures continuity and natural dynamics in head and emotion alignment, essential for lifelike animation.\
**Diversity.** Fig. <a href="#fig:sample_diversity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:sample_diversity">5</a> shows two sequences generated with Top-k sampling (k=15) in FMLG, where each row represents frames from the same speech input. The model demonstrates diverse facial expressions and head movements while maintaining accurate lip sync, highlighting Top-k sampling’s role in enhancing motion variety without compromising synchronization.\
**Emotional Expression.** Fig. <a href="#fig:Qualitative_RAVDESS_angry" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Qualitative_RAVDESS_angry">3</a> presents our model has more accurate emotional expression ability due to the better speech understanding ability of AR transformer.\
**Finer Motion Details.** Fig. <a href="#fig:movements" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:movements">6</a> highlights fine motion details in neck and earring movements. Compared to other methods, Teller produces realistic, nuanced motions synchronized with speech, capturing subtle audio-driven dynamics that contribute to lifelike and temporally coherent animation. The consistent detail across frames underscores Teller’s robustness.\
**Lip Synchronization Accuracy.** Fig. <a href="#fig:Lip_acc" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:Lip_acc">7</a> shows superior lip synchronization, with Teller aligning generated lip shapes closely to natural movements. This high fidelity highlights Teller’s strength in producing realistic, synchronized mouth motions for convincing talking head animation.

## Human Evaluation

We conducted a human evaluation to assess the quality of generated animations, focusing on lip synchronization, body movement realism, and temporal coherence. Thirty participants (66.7% aged 24-30, 33.3% aged 30-40; 30% male, 70% female; 83.3% with AIGC model experience) rated each animation on a 5-point Likert scale for coherence with input and animation quality. A total of 100 videos were presented in random order to avoid bias, providing insights into subjective perceptions of animation quality and natural expression alignment. As shown in Figure <a href="#fig:human_eval" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:human_eval">8</a>, participants rated Teller highest in lip synchronization, body movement realism, and temporal coherence, with low variance in scores, indicating robust and consistent performance.

# Ablation Study

**Stage (Module) Ablation.** We perform an ablation study comparing Stage 1 and Stage 2, focusing on animation quality in body parts and accessories, especially neck muscles and earrings. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:module_ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:module_ablation">9</a>, Stage 1 outputs often show less realistic, inconsistent movements. In contrast, Stage 2, with ETM, significantly improves the physical consistency of subtle motions, creating natural earring sway and smooth neck movements for lifelike, temporally coherent animation.

<figure id="fig:module_ablation" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/module_ablation.pdf" />
<figcaption>Visualization of the generation images with different stages and the differences between stages.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Frames / Tokens in RVQ Module** Figure <a href="#fig:VQ_ablation" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:VQ_ablation">10</a> shows the impact of frame and token configurations in the RVQ module on face shape accuracy in talking head animations. This ablation study explores how varying frames and tokens affects facial movement quality and synchronization. Results show that increasing frames and tokens improves facial dynamics, enhancing lip synchronization and realism, though with higher computational costs. We selected 4 frames and 32 tokens for an optimal balance, adjustable as needed.

<figure id="fig:VQ_ablation" data-latex-placement="t!">
<embed src="images/VQ_ablation.pdf" />
<figcaption>Tradeoff between performance (loss) and different compression(tokens/frame ) ratios.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Ablation Study on Audio Condition Encoder.** We analyzed the performance differences between TTS and ASR models as audio condition encoders for our task. Specifically, we used Whisper for the ASR model and funcodec for the TTS model. As shown in Table <a href="#tab:audio_encoder_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:audio_encoder_comparison">1</a>, Whisper achieved a Sync-C score of 7.696 and a Sync-D score of 7.536, while funcodec scored 4.286 in Sync-C and 10.373 in Sync-D. These results indicate that our task benefits more from the ASR model’s capability to capture the nuances required for precise synchronization, as seen in Whisper’s higher Sync-C and lower Sync-D scores. This analysis suggests that the ASR model is better suited as the audio condition encoder, enhancing the overall quality and synchronization of our talking head animation.

<div id="tab:audio_encoder_comparison">

| Method     | Sync-C $`\uparrow`$ | Sync-D $`\downarrow`$ |
|:-----------|:-------------------:|:---------------------:|
| w funcodec |        4.286        |        10.373         |
| w whisper  |      **7.696**      |       **7.536**       |

Comparison of synchronization for audio conditions using funcodec and Whisper in ASR and TTS tasks on HDTF.

</div>

**Ablation Study on Single-Head vs. Multi-Head Architecture.** We compare single-head and multi-head models on FID, FVD, Sync-C, and Sync-D metrics (Table <a href="#tab:onehead_mulhead_comparison" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:onehead_mulhead_comparison">2</a>). The single-head model slightly outperforms in FID (22.110 vs. 21.352) and has comparable FVD (172.553 vs. 173.463), with marginally better synchronization (Sync-C of 7.790 vs. 7.696 and Sync-D of 7.474 vs. 7.536). Both architectures yield competitive results, though the single-head model slightly excels in synchronization, while the multi-head model offers greater real-time potential .

<div id="tab:onehead_mulhead_comparison">

| Method | **FID$`\downarrow`$** | **FVD$`\downarrow`$** | **Sync-C$`\uparrow`$** | **Sync-D$`\downarrow`$** |
|:---|:---|:---|:--:|:--:|
| Single-Head | 22.110 | **172.553** | **7.790** | **7.474** |
| Multi-Head | **21.352** | 173.463 | 7.696 | 7.536 |

Comparison of performance between Single-Head and Multi-Head on the HDTF dataset.

</div>

<span id="tab:onehead_mulhead_comparison" label="tab:onehead_mulhead_comparison"></span>

# Conclusion

In this paper, we presented **Teller**, the first autoregressive framework designed for real-time, audio-driven portrait animation. Addressing the challenge of realistic and efficient talking head generation, Teller achieves high-quality animations at up to 25 FPS, surpassing existing methods in both fidelity and responsiveness. Extensive experiments demonstrated Teller’s advantages over SoTA audio-driven animation methods, particularly in rendering nuanced movements essential for lifelike and visually convincing animations. Human evaluations further validate its quality, particularly in natural expression and lip synchronization. By balancing computational efficiency with high animation fidelity, Teller sets a new standard for real-time talking head animation, marking a significant advancement in multimodal portrait animation frameworks. Additionally, Teller’s AR Transformer architecture makes it compatible with existing unified multimodal language models.

## References

1. Emanuele Aiello, Lili Yu, Yixin Nie, Armen Aghajanyan, and Barlas Oguz.
\newblock Jointly training large autoregressive multimodal models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.15564}, 2023. [arXiv:2309.15564](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.15564)
2. Jinze Bai, Shuai Bai, Yunfei Chu, Zeyu Cui, Kai Dang, Xiaodong Deng, Yang Fan, Wenbin Ge, Yu Han, Fei Huang, et~al.
\newblock Qwen technical report.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609}, 2023. [arXiv:2309.16609](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.16609)
3. Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung~Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis.
\newblock Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 22563--22575, 2023.
4. Egor Burkov, Igor Pasechnik, Artur Grigorev, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Neural head reenactment with latent pose descriptors.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 13786--13795, 2020.
5. Nan Cao, Yu-Ru Lin, Xiaohua Sun, David Lazer, Shixia Liu, and Huamin Qu.
\newblock Whisper: Tracing the spatiotemporal process of information diffusion in real time.
\newblock \emph{IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics}, 18\penalty0 (12):\penalty0 2649--2658, 2012.
6. Zhiyuan Chen, Jiajiong Cao, Zhiquan Chen, Yuming Li, and Chenguang Ma.
\newblock Echomimic: Lifelike audio-driven portrait animations through editable landmark conditions.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08136}, 2024. [arXiv:2407.08136](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08136)
7. {\"O}zg{\"u}n {\c{C}}i{\c{c}}ek, Ahmed Abdulkadir, Soeren~S Lienkamp, Thomas Brox, and Olaf Ronneberger.
\newblock 3d u-net: learning dense volumetric segmentation from sparse annotation.
\newblock In \emph{Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention--MICCAI 2016: 19th International Conference, Athens, Greece, October 17-21, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 19}, pages 424--432. Springer, 2016.
8. Runpei Dong, Chunrui Han, Yuang Peng, Zekun Qi, Zheng Ge, Jinrong Yang, Liang Zhao, Jianjian Sun, Hongyu Zhou, Haoran Wei, et~al.
\newblock Dreamllm: Synergistic multimodal comprehension and creation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.11499}, 2023. [arXiv:2309.11499](https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.11499)
9. Nikita Drobyshev, Jenya Chelishev, Taras Khakhulin, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Victor Lempitsky, and Egor Zakharov.
\newblock Megaportraits: One-shot megapixel neural head avatars.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 2663--2671, 2022.
10. Ariel Ephrat, Inbar Mosseri, Oran Lang, Tali Dekel, Kevin Wilson, Avinatan Hassidim, William~T. Freeman, and Michael Rubinstein.
\newblock Looking to listen at the cocktail party: a speaker-independent audio-visual model for speech separation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 37\penalty0 (4):\penalty0 1–11, 2018.
11. Yuying Ge, Sijie Zhao, Jinguo Zhu, Yixiao Ge, Kun Yi, Lin Song, Chen Li, Xiaohan Ding, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Seed-x: Multimodal models with unified multi-granularity comprehension and generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14396}, 2024. [arXiv:2404.14396](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14396)
12. Jianzhu Guo, Dingyun Zhang, Xiaoqiang Liu, Zhizhou Zhong, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan, and Di Zhang.
\newblock Liveportrait: Efficient portrait animation with stitching and retargeting control.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03168}, 2024. [arXiv:2407.03168](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.03168)
13. Yuwei Guo, Ceyuan Yang, Anyi Rao, Zhengyang Liang, Yaohui Wang, Yu Qiao, Maneesh Agrawala, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai.
\newblock Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04725}, 2023. [arXiv:2307.04725](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04725)
14. Tianyu He, Junliang Guo, Runyi Yu, Yuchi Wang, Jialiang Zhu, Kaikai An, Leyi Li, Xu Tan, Chunyu Wang, Han Hu, et~al.
\newblock Gaia: Zero-shot talking avatar generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.15230}, 2023. [arXiv:2311.15230](../2023/2311.15230.md)
15. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
16. Li Hu.
\newblock Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis for character animation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 8153--8163, 2024.
17. Jianwen Jiang, Chao Liang, Jiaqi Yang, Gaojie Lin, Tianyun Zhong, and Yanbo Zheng.
\newblock Loopy: Taming audio-driven portrait avatar with long-term motion dependency.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02634}, 2024. [arXiv:2409.02634](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.02634)
18. Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual control.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 3387--3396, 2022.
19. Steven~R Livingstone and Frank~A Russo.
\newblock The ryerson audio-visual database of emotional speech and song (ravdess): A dynamic, multimodal set of facial and vocal expressions in north american english.
\newblock \emph{PloS one}, 13\penalty0 (5):\penalty0 e0196391, 2018.
20. I Loshchilov.
\newblock Decoupled weight decay regularization.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101}, 2017. [arXiv:1711.05101](https://arxiv.org/abs/1711.05101)
21. Yuanxun Lu, Jinxiang Chai, and Xun Cao.
\newblock Live speech portraits: real-time photorealistic talking-head animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 40\penalty0 (6):\penalty0 1--17, 2021.
22. Camillo Lugaresi, Jiuqiang Tang, Hadon Nash, Chris McClanahan, Esha Uboweja, Michael Hays, Fan Zhang, Chuo-Ling Chang, Ming~Guang Yong, Juhyun Lee, et~al.
\newblock Mediapipe: A framework for building perception pipelines.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08172}, 2019. [arXiv:1906.08172](https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08172)
23. Youxin Pang, Yong Zhang, Weize Quan, Yanbo Fan, Xiaodong Cun, Ying Shan, and Dong-ming Yan.
\newblock Dpe: Disentanglement of pose and expression for general video portrait editing.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 427--436, 2023.
24. KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
25. Shuai Shen, Wenliang Zhao, Zibin Meng, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Jie Zhou, and Jiwen Lu.
\newblock Difftalk: Crafting diffusion models for generalized audio-driven portraits animation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 1982--1991, 2023.
26. Aliaksandr Siarohin, St{\'e}phane Lathuili{\`e}re, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe.
\newblock First order motion model for image animation.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 32, 2019.
27. Micha{\l} Stypu{\l}kowski, Konstantinos Vougioukas, Sen He, Maciej Zi{\k{e}}ba, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Diffused heads: Diffusion models beat gans on talking-face generation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision}, pages 5091--5100, 2024.
28. Quan Sun, Qiying Yu, Yufeng Cui, Fan Zhang, Xiaosong Zhang, Yueze Wang, Hongcheng Gao, Jingjing Liu, Tiejun Huang, and Xinlong Wang.
\newblock Generative pretraining in multimodality.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05222}, 2023. [arXiv:2307.05222](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.05222)
29. Zhiyao Sun, Tian Lv, Sheng Ye, Matthieu Lin, Jenny Sheng, Yu-Hui Wen, Minjing Yu, and Yong-jin Liu.
\newblock Diffposetalk: Speech-driven stylistic 3d facial animation and head pose generation via diffusion models.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 43\penalty0 (4):\penalty0 1--9, 2024.
30. Zineng Tang, Ziyi Yang, Chenguang Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Mohit Bansal.
\newblock Any-to-any generation via composable diffusion.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 36, 2024.
31. Chameleon Team.
\newblock Chameleon: Mixed-modal early-fusion foundation models, 2024.
\newblock \emph{URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2405.09818}, 2024.
32. Linrui Tian, Qi Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo.
\newblock Emo: Emote portrait alive-generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.17485}, 2024. [arXiv:2402.17485](../2024/2402.17485.md)
33. Thomas Unterthiner, Sjoerd Van~Steenkiste, Karol Kurach, Raphael Marinier, Marcin Michalski, and Sylvain Gelly.
\newblock Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric \& challenges.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717}, 2018. [arXiv:1812.01717](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01717)
34. Duomin Wang, Yu Deng, Zixin Yin, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Progressive disentangled representation learning for fine-grained controllable talking head synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 17979--17989, 2023.
35. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video conferencing.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 10039--10049, 2021.
36. Xinlong Wang, Xiaosong Zhang, Zhengxiong Luo, Quan Sun, Yufeng Cui, Jinsheng Wang, Fan Zhang, Yueze Wang, Zhen Li, Qiying Yu, et~al.
\newblock Emu3: Next-token prediction is all you need.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18869}, 2024. [arXiv:2409.18869](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.18869)
37. Huawei Wei, Zejun Yang, and Zhisheng Wang.
\newblock Aniportrait: Audio-driven synthesis of photorealistic portrait animation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17694}, 2024. [arXiv:2403.17694](../2024/2403.17694.md)
38. Jinheng Xie, Weijia Mao, Zechen Bai, David~Junhao Zhang, Weihao Wang, Kevin~Qinghong Lin, Yuchao Gu, Zhijie Chen, Zhenheng Yang, and Mike~Zheng Shou.
\newblock Show-o: One single transformer to unify multimodal understanding and generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12528}, 2024. [arXiv:2408.12528](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12528)
39. Liangbin Xie, Xintao Wang, Honglun Zhang, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Vfhq: A high-quality dataset and benchmark for video face super-resolution.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 657--666, 2022.
40. Mingwang Xu, Hui Li, Qingkun Su, Hanlin Shang, Liwei Zhang, Ce Liu, Jingdong Wang, Luc Van~Gool, Yao Yao, and Siyu Zhu.
\newblock Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait image animation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08801}, 2024{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2406.08801](../2024/2406.08801.md)
41. Sicheng Xu, Guojun Chen, Yu-Xiao Guo, Jiaolong Yang, Chong Li, Zhenyu Zang, Yizhong Zhang, Xin Tong, and Baining Guo.
\newblock Vasa-1: Lifelike audio-driven talking faces generated in real time.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.10667}, 2024{\natexlab{b}}. [arXiv:2404.10667](https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.10667)
42. Ziyu Yao, Xuxin Cheng, and Zhiqi Huang.
\newblock Fd2talk: Towards generalized talking head generation with facial decoupled diffusion model.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 3411--3420, 2024.
43. Hanrong Ye, De-An Huang, Yao Lu, Zhiding Yu, Wei Ping, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, Song Han, Dan Xu, Pavlo Molchanov, et~al.
\newblock X-vila: Cross-modality alignment for large language model.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19335}, 2024. [arXiv:2405.19335](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.19335)
44. Fei Yin, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Mingdeng Cao, Yanbo Fan, Xuan Wang, Qingyan Bai, Baoyuan Wu, Jue Wang, and Yujiu Yang.
\newblock Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution editable talking face generation via pre-trained stylegan.
\newblock In \emph{European conference on computer vision}, pages 85--101. Springer, 2022.
45. Neil Zeghidour, Alejandro Luebs, Ahmed Omran, Jan Skoglund, and Marco Tagliasacchi.
\newblock Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio codec.
\newblock \emph{IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language Processing}, 30:\penalty0 495--507, 2021.
46. Wenxuan Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Xuan Wang, Yong Zhang, Xi Shen, Yu Guo, Ying Shan, and Fei Wang.
\newblock Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 8652--8661, 2023.
47. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 3661--3670, 2021.
48. Chunting Zhou, Lili Yu, Arun Babu, Kushal Tirumala, Michihiro Yasunaga, Leonid Shamis, Jacob Kahn, Xuezhe Ma, Luke Zettlemoyer, and Omer Levy.
\newblock Transfusion: Predict the next token and diffuse images with one multi-modal model.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11039}, 2024. [arXiv:2408.11039](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.11039)
49. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pages 4176--4186, 2021.
50. Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevarria, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Dingzeyu Li.
\newblock Makelttalk: speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions On Graphics (TOG)}, 39\penalty0 (6):\penalty0 1--15, 2020.
51. Jinguo Zhu, Xiaohan Ding, Yixiao Ge, Yuying Ge, Sijie Zhao, Hengshuang Zhao, Xiaohua Wang, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Vl-gpt: A generative pre-trained transformer for vision and language understanding and generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09251}, 2023. [arXiv:2312.09251](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09251)
