---
arxiv_id: '2505.20582'
title: 'Total-Editing: Head Avatar with Editable Appearance, Motion, and Lighting'
authors:
- Yizhou Zhao
- Chunjiang Liu
- Haoyu Chen
- Bhiksha Raj
- Min Xu
- Tadas Baltrusaitis
- Mitch Rundle
- HsiangTao Wu
- Kamran Ghasedi
submitted: '2025-05-26'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.20582
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 11/84
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:14:38+00:00'
references_parsed: 84
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Generating realistic human portraits is essential for various applications, including virtual reality, augmented reality, social media, gaming, and film production. Within these fields, face reenactment and portrait relighting are two pivotal tasks. Face reenactment involves transferring motion, i.e., facial expressions and head pose, from one person to another, and enables lifelike talking-head applications such as video conferencing , virtual avatars , and video dubbing . Portrait relighting, on the other hand, focuses on modifying a portrait’s lighting to match diverse environments, enhancing realism and immersion by adapting to the dynamic lighting in virtual spaces . Despite their inherent synergy, face reenactment and portrait relighting have largely been treated as separate tasks.

This raises a question, *should they be considered jointly?* Indeed, face reenactment benefits from dynamic relighting to ensure natural light and shadow transitions during head motion, while portrait relighting can leverage the abundant monocular video datasets used in reenactment, which are more accessible than traditional light-stage datasets. Jointly addressing both tasks improves adaptability and realism in portrait editing, opening new possibilities for immersive applications. To this end, we introduce Total-Editing, a novel portrait editing framework that integrates face reenactment and portrait relighting in an end-to-end pipeline.

Our design is guided by several key insights. First, existing face reenactment methods  struggle to model lighting variations without explicit guidance, leading to fixed light and shadow under uneven lighting conditions, as shown in <a href="#fig:qualitative_uneven_lighting" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_uneven_lighting">1</a>. This challenge becomes even more pronounced when the training data lacks large head motions or strong shading effects, which are essential for learning illumination consistency. To address this, we introduce an intrinsically decomposed neural radiance field (NeRF) decoder to decompose volumetric color into intrinsic components, allowing direct control over lighting. Moreover, we develop a physically rendered dataset that captures subject motion under diverse lighting conditions to complement real data and enhance illumination awareness.

Next, 3D Morphable Models (3DMM)  based motion editing  relies on surface fields (SF)  for feature warping. Due to the reliance on nearest neighbors, it often requires additional spatio-temporal smoothing to mitigate discontinuities in feature propagation. To this end, we propose a Moving Least Squares (MLS)  based deformation field, which naturally ensures smooth and continuous deformations through its globally aware MLS kernel. Unlike SF-based methods, MLS supports both translational deformation, which adjusts only position attributes, and rotational deformation, which is crucial for transforming directional properties like normal vectors. This supports our model to provide more realistic portrait shading, as in <a href="#fig:qualitative_uneven_lighting" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_uneven_lighting">1</a>.

Finally, Total-Editing achieves portrait synthesis with disentangled appearance, motion, and lighting conditions. Shown in <a href="#fig:teaser" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:teaser">[fig:teaser]</a>, our method produces natural light shifts on the face during head motion (top-left), robust results with lighting estimated from portraits (top-right); realistic HDR environment map based illumination (bottom-right); and intrinsic decomposition into specular, diffuse, normal and albedo components (bottom-left).

Our contributions can be summed up as follows:

- We present a novel framework, Total-Editing, that conducts 3D-aware portrait generation given an appearance source, a motion source, and a lighting source, facilitating more precise control and more versatile applications compared to face reenactment and portrait relighting models.

- We introduce an intrinsically decomposed NeRF decoder that uses estimated or pre-filtered lightmaps to represent lighting conditions. This allows flexible lighting control of portraits via source images or HDR environment maps.

- We propose an MLS-based deformation field, which supports general affine deformation, including translation and rotation. It produces improved spatiotemporal consistencies than its SF-based counterparts.

- We contribute a physically rendered synthetic dataset for general portrait editing, featuring 2M frames that capture diverse subjects, views, poses, expressions, and lighting environments. Each subject is presented with corresponding motion sequences across multiple environments.

<figure id="fig:qualitative_uneven_lighting" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/qualitative_uneven_lighting.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Face reenactment under uneven lighting.</strong> Existing models like <span class="citation" data-cites="deng2024portrait4dv2"></span> couple facial textures and lighting, resulting in fixed light and shadow that do not adapt to head movements. In contrast, our model provides more realistic portrait shading.</figcaption>
</figure>

# Related Work

**Face Reenactment** has seen significant advancements in recent years initially built on the success of CNN and GAN . Early strategies inserted features from driving images into 2D generative networks to create animatable portraits . Recent approaches represent expressions and head poses as warp fields, deforming source images to match driving images . While these methods produce high-quality images, they often lack 3D consistency, limiting realistic results under varied poses and expressions. Some methods incorporate 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) into 2D frameworks , but they are still limited by the accuracy of monocular 3DMM reconstructions. Building on the success of neural radiance fields (NeRF) , several methods  have adopted NeRF for head reconstruction, but their reliance on multi-view or single-view videos limits generalization. Some works train generators for controllable head avatars based on identity inversion, but often fail to preserve the source identity due to inversion limitations. By learning canonical triplane representations in NeRF-based models, Trevithick et al.  provide real-time 3D-aware novel view synthesis without expression change via volume rendering, and Portrait4D series  tackles dynamic expression modeling using synthetic and pseudo multi-view data. Despite their advancements, these methods have difficulty separating lighting effects from facial features, leading to fixed light and shadows on the face. In contrast, our approach achieves precise illumination consistency, allowing natural lighting shifts in response to head movements.

<figure id="fig:pipeline" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/pipeline.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>The framework of Total-Editing.</strong> <a href="#subsec:appearance_motion" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="subsec:appearance_motion">3.2</a>: Our pipeline learns to encode appearance and motion sources <span class="math inline"><strong>I</strong><sub>app</sub>, <strong>I</strong><sub>mot</sub></span>, neutralize the expression from <span class="math inline"><strong>I</strong><sub>app</sub></span> and reapply the expression from <span class="math inline"><strong>I</strong><sub>mot</sub></span> to obtain a fused feature <span class="math inline"><strong>F</strong></span>. After generating canonical space geometry and shading tri-planes <span class="math inline"><strong>T</strong><sub>geo</sub>, <strong>T</strong><sub>shd</sub></span>, the neck pose is handled by warping features with moving least squares based deformation fields <span class="math inline">ℛ, 𝒯</span>. <a href="#subsec:illumination" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="subsec:illumination">3.4</a>: For the lighting source, we either estimate from a portrait image <span class="math inline"><strong>I</strong><sub>lit</sub></span> or pre-filter (bake) an HDR environment map <span class="math inline"><strong>I</strong><sub>HDR</sub></span>, resulting in diffuse and specular lightmaps <span class="math inline"><strong>S</strong><sub>d</sub>, {<strong>S</strong><sub>s</sub>(<em>n</em>)}</span>. <a href="#subsec:geometry_shading" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="subsec:geometry_shading">3.3</a>: With the lighting information, geometry and shading decoders <span class="math inline">𝒟<sub>geo</sub>, 𝒟<sub>shd</sub></span> decode point-wise attributes. Finally, a neural renderer and a super-resolution module render the editing result <span class="math inline">$\hat{\mathbf{I}}$</span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Portrait Relighting** aims to realistically re-illuminate human face images. Early work by Debevec et al.  introduced a method for HDR face relighting using a light stage to capture images one light at a time (OLAT). This method was extended by , but they are limited to subjects captured within the light stage setup. To address this, utilize synthetic data for training. Some advancements in portrait relighting leverage diverse approaches, including diffusion models, neural fields, GANs, and physics-guided models . For lighting representations, some approaches  utilize Spherical Harmonics (SH)  as a compact lighting representation. Other methods  use pre-filtered lightmaps from HDR environment maps to capture higher frequency lighting details. Recently, SwitchLight  leverages the Cook-Torrance reflectance model  for precise light-surface interactions. Unlike these approaches which are mostly 2D-based, our method leverages 3D representations for free-view rendering and video-conditioned animations, requiring less training data and facilitating more flexible applications.

# Method

Taking as input an appearance source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$, a motion source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$, and a lighting source, either a portrait image $`\mathbf{I}_\text{lit}`$ or an HDR environment map $`\mathbf{I}_\text{HDR}`$, our goal is to synthesize a 3D head that combines the appearance of $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$, the motion of $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$, and the lighting of $`\mathbf{I}_\text{lit}`$ or $`\mathbf{I}_\text{HDR}`$. To achieve this, we present the Total-Editing framework, as depicted in <a href="#fig:pipeline" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:pipeline">2</a>, disentangling the control of appearance, motion, and lighting. For appearance, we use a pre-trained appearance encoder  to extract appearance features from $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$. For motion, we employ an off-the-shelf expression encoder  to extract appearance-free expression features, allowing us to neutralize the expression in $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$ (de-enactment) and apply the expression from $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$ (re-enactment), and moving least squares based deformation fields to capture the neck pose. As for lighting, we leverage pre-filtered HDR environment maps, i.e., lightmaps, as our lighting representation. Further, we decompose point-wise colors in 3D volumes with the Phong reflection model to isolate shading effects from portrait materials. In this way, our framework effectively disentangles and integrates appearance, motion, and lighting conditions, enabling the synthesis of realistic 3D head models with precise control over each attribute.

## Preliminaries

### Phong Reflection Model

The Phong reflection model  is a widely used lighting model for simulating the way surfaces reflect light. For each point on the surface, it decomposes the reflection into three terms, namely, the ambient reflection ($`\mathbf{c}_\text{a}`$), the diffuse reflection ($`\mathbf{c}_\text{d}`$), and the specular reflection ($`\mathbf{c}_\text{s}`$),
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{c}= \mathbf{c}_\text{a} + \mathbf{c}_\text{d} + \mathbf{c}_\text{s},
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathbf{c}`$ is the total reflection intensity at this point. We omit the ambient component $`\mathbf{c}_\text{a}`$ in our model and calculate the diffuse and specular components as
``` math
\begin{align}
\label{eq:int_diffuse}
    \mathbf{c}_\text{d} &= k_\text{d}\mathbf{a}\odot\mathbf{s}_\text{d},
    \;\mathbf{s}_\text{d}=\int_\Omega{\mathbf{L}(\mathbf{l})\left(\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{l}\right) d\mathbf{l}}, \\
\label{eq:int_specular}
    \mathbf{c}_\text{s} &= \sum_n k_\text{s}(n)\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n),
    \;\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n)=\int_\Omega{\mathbf{L}(\mathbf{l})(\mathbf{r}\cdot\mathbf{l})^n d\mathbf{l}}.
\end{align}
```
Here, $`\odot`$ denotes the Hadamard product, scalars $`k_\text{d}`$ and $`k_\text{s}(n)`$ are the diffuse and specular coefficients, $`\mathbf{a}`$ is the surface albedo, and $`n\in\{1,16,32,64\}`$ is the shininess exponent. We refer to $`\mathbf{s}_\text{d}`$ and $`\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n)`$ as diffuse and specular shadings. They sum the incoming light $`\mathbf{L}(\mathbf{l})`$ from all directions $`\mathbf{l}`$ over the hemisphere $`\Omega`$ above the surface. In the integral, $`\mathbf{n}`$ and $`\mathbf{r}`$ are the surface normal and the reflected viewing direction, with
``` math
\begin{align}
\label{eq:reflect}
    \mathbf{r}= 2(\mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{v})\mathbf{n}- \mathbf{v},
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathbf{v}`$ is the viewing direction.

### Pre-filtering Environment Maps

Inspired by , we pre-filter HDR environment maps with Phong lobes to avoid expensive real-time reflection computations. For each surface normal $`\mathbf{n}`$ in <a href="#eq:int_diffuse" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="eq:int_diffuse">[eq:int_diffuse]</a>, we pre-integrate the diffuse shading as $`\mathbf{s}_\text{d}(\mathbf{n})`$. Similarly, for each reflected viewing direction $`\mathbf{r}`$ in <a href="#eq:int_specular" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="eq:int_specular">[eq:int_specular]</a>, we precompute the specular shading as $`\mathbf{s}(n,\mathbf{r})`$. Aggregating each gives us the diffuse lightmap $`\mathbf{S}_\text{d}=\{\mathbf{s}_\text{d}(\mathbf{n})\}_{\mathbf{n}\in\Omega}`$ and specular lightmaps $`\{\mathbf{S}_\text{s}(n)\}_n=\{\{\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n,\mathbf{r})\}_{\mathbf{r}\in\Omega}\}_n`$. This process is also referred to as lightmap baking. At runtime, shading calculations are simplified to look-ups in these precomputed lightmaps with $`\mathbf{n}`$ or $`\mathbf{r}`$, reducing the computational complexity of rendering each pixel from $`O(N)`$, where $`N`$ is the number of incident rays from the environment, to $`O(1)`$.

### Image Formation

Integrating the Phong reflection model into volumetric rendering, we derive the expected color $`\mathbf{C}(\mathbf{p})`$ of camera ray $`\mathbf{p}(t)=\mathbf{o}+t\mathbf{d}`$ with $`t\in[t_n,t_f]`$ and $`\mathbf{d}=-\mathbf{v}`$,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{C}(\mathbf{p})=\int_{t_n}^{t_f}T(t)\sigma(\mathbf{p}(t))\mathbf{c}(\mathbf{p}(t),\mathbf{v})dt,
    \\
    T(t)=\exp\left(-\int_{t_n}^{t}\sigma(\mathbf{p}(s))ds\right),
\end{align}
```
where $`T`$ is the accumulated transmittance and $`\sigma`$ is the volume density. We rewrite reflection as $`\mathbf{c}(\mathbf{p}(t),\mathbf{v})`$ since its diffuse component $`\mathbf{c}_\text{d}`$ is position dependent and its specular component $`\mathbf{c}_\text{s}`$ is position and view dependent,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{c}_\text{d} &= \mathbf{c}_\text{d}(\mathbf{p}) = k_\text{d}(\mathbf{p})\mathbf{a}(\mathbf{p})\odot\mathbf{s}_\text{d}(\mathbf{n}(\mathbf{p})),
    \\
    \mathbf{c}_\text{s} &= \mathbf{c}_\text{s}(\mathbf{p},\mathbf{v}) = \sum_n k_\text{s}(n,\mathbf{p})\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n,\mathbf{n}(\mathbf{p}),\mathbf{v}).
\end{align}
```

## Learning Appearance and Motion

We follow  to incorporate appearance and motion control in Total-Editing with decoupled learning. Specifically, we adopt an off-the-shelf expression encoder $`\mathcal{E}_\text{mot}`$ to extract 1D expression features for both appearance and motion sources, $`\mathbf{e}_\text{app} = \mathcal{E}_\text{mot}(\mathbf{I}_\text{app})`$, $`\mathbf{e}_\text{mot} = \mathcal{E}_\text{mot}(\mathbf{I}_\text{mot})`$, and an appearance encoder $`\mathcal{E}_\text{app}`$ to extract 2D appearance features from the appearance source, $`\mathbf{F}_\text{app} = \mathcal{E}_\text{app}(\mathbf{I}_\text{app})`$. All these features are fused with two Transformer-based modules, a deenactor $`\mathcal{F}_\text{de}`$ and a following reenactor $`\mathcal{F}_\text{re}`$,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{F}&= \mathcal{F}_\text{re}(\mathcal{F}_\text{de}(\mathbf{F}_\text{app}, \mathbf{e}_\text{app}), \mathbf{e}_\text{mot}).
\end{align}
```
Together, they learn to embed the appearance from $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$, neutralize it, and inject the expressions from $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$. Using the fused appearance and expression features $`\mathbf{F}`$, we generate a geometry tri-plane $`\mathbf{T}_\text{geo}`$ and a shading tri-plane $`\mathbf{T}_\text{shd}`$,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{T}_\text{geo} &= \mathcal{E}_\text{geo}(\mathbf{F}),\;\mathbf{T}_\text{shd} = \mathcal{E}_\text{shd}(\mathbf{F}),
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathcal{E}_\text{geo}`$ and $`\mathcal{E}_\text{shd}`$ are the geometry and shading encoders, respectively, both with a ViT-based architecture . To handle the neck pose, we further derive deformation fields $`\mathcal{T},\mathcal{R}`$ with FLAME meshes. They will then be utilized to warp tri-plane features and rotate decoded normals from the unposed canonical space to the posed target space, as shown in <a href="#fig:deformation" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:deformation">3</a>. Unlike  using the Surface Field (SF) approach  that determines the deformation for each sample point by the motion of nearest triangles, we adopt moving least squares (MLS)  instead to obtain continuous deformation results. Our intuition is that by globally averaging transformations, MLS enables more natural transitions and reduces the risk of artifacts that can occur with the more localized SF method. Specifically, we set posed mesh vertices $`\mathbf{V}^\text{t}`$ and their unposed correspondences $`\mathbf{V}^\text{c}`$ as control points, and solve for the transformation $`\mathcal{T}`$ of sample point $`\mathbf{p}`$ by
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathop{\mathrm{argmin}}_\mathcal{T}\sum_i w_i(\mathbf{V}^\text{t}, \mathbf{p})\left\lVert\mathcal{T}(\mathbf{V}^\text{t}_i)-\mathbf{V}^\text{c}_i\right\rVert_2^2,
\end{align}
```
where the weights are of the form
``` math
\begin{align}
    w_i(\mathbf{X}, \mathbf{p})=\left\lVert\mathbf{X}_i-\mathbf{p}\right\rVert_2^{-2\alpha},
\end{align}
```
with $`\alpha=1.0`$ being a fall-off parameter. Note that this formulation lets $`w_i(\mathbf{V}^\text{t}, \mathbf{V}^\text{t}_i)=\infty`$ and thus $`\mathcal{T}(\mathbf{V}^\text{t}_i)=\mathbf{V}^\text{c}_i`$. Confining $`\mathcal{T}`$ to be a rigid transformation, this minimization can be solved via singular value decomposition. Similarly, we obtain the rotation field $`\mathcal{R}`$ by controlling with normals
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathop{\mathrm{argmin}}_\mathcal{R}\sum_i w_i(\mathbf{V}^\text{t}, \mathbf{p})\left\lVert\mathcal{R}(\mathbf{N}^\text{t}_i)-\mathbf{N}^\text{c}_i\right\rVert_2^2,
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathbf{N}^\text{t}`$ and $`\mathbf{N}^\text{c}`$ are surface normal directions on posed and unposed meshes, respectively.

<figure id="fig:deformation" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/deformation.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Deformation field comparison.</strong> (a) Similar to <span class="citation" data-cites="deng2024portrait4d deng2024portrait4dv2"></span> we derive deformation field from FLAME meshes. Points and attached normals are sampled from the posed target space and then deformed into the unposed canonical space by deformation fields <span class="math inline">𝒯</span> and <span class="math inline">ℛ</span>. (b) Surface Field (SF) based approach <span class="citation" data-cites="bergman2022generative"></span> assigns each grid to the nearest mesh triangle, leading to discontinuous deformation results. (c) In contrast, our moving least squares (MLS) based deformation field weighs per-point deformation with its inverse distance to all mesh vertices, producing smoother results.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Learning Geometry and Shading

<figure id="fig:shading" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/shading_decoder.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Shading module architecture.</strong> The shading feature <span class="math inline"><strong>t</strong><sub>shd</sub></span> sampled from a position in the shading tri-plane is first decoded into normal <span class="math inline"><strong>n</strong></span>, albedo <span class="math inline"><strong>a</strong></span>, and additional features <span class="math inline"><strong>w</strong></span> for super-resolution. The viewing direction <span class="math inline"><strong>v</strong></span> is then reflected with the normal <span class="math inline"><strong>n</strong></span>, resulting in a reflected viewing direction <span class="math inline"><strong>r</strong></span>. <span class="math inline"><strong>n</strong></span> and <span class="math inline"><strong>r</strong></span> are concatenated with <span class="math inline"><strong>t</strong><sub>shd</sub></span> and mapped to a diffuse coefficient <span class="math inline"><em>k</em><sub>d</sub></span> and specular coefficients <span class="math inline">{<em>k</em><sub>s</sub>(<em>n</em>)}</span> for various shininess values <span class="math inline">{<em>n</em>}</span>, respectively. They are also used to sample a diffuse shading <span class="math inline"><strong>s</strong><sub>d</sub></span> and specular shadings <span class="math inline">{<strong>s</strong><sub>s</sub>(<em>n</em>)}</span> from corresponding lightmaps. These shadings, <span class="math inline"><strong>s</strong><sub>d</sub>, {<strong>s</strong><sub>s</sub>(<em>n</em>)}</span>, are concatenated with the albedo <span class="math inline"><strong>a</strong></span> to decode a residual color <span class="math inline"><em>δ</em><strong>c</strong></span>. The final color <span class="math inline"><strong>c</strong></span> at this position is obtained by combining PBR and neural residual <span class="math inline"><em>δ</em><strong>c</strong></span> in <a href="#eq:render" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="eq:render">[eq:render]</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

We then decode point-wise attributes with MLP-based decoders. Specifically, for each sample point $`\mathbf{p}`$ in the geometry tri-plane, the geometry decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{geo}`$ decode its volume density from the geometry feature $`\mathbf{t}_\text{geo}`$ at this point,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \sigma &= \mathcal{D}_\text{geo}(\mathbf{t}_\text{geo}),\;\text{where }\mathbf{t}_\text{geo}=\mathbf{T}_\text{geo}(\mathcal{T}(\mathbf{p})),
\end{align}
```
and $`\mathcal{T}`$ is the FLAME-derived translation field warping $`\mathbf{p}`$ from the target space to the canonical space. To inject illumination awareness into our neural renderer, we extend the color decoder in  to a shading decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{shd}`$ that decomposes the volume color according to the Phong reflection model. It incorporates a surface decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{f}`$, a diffuse decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{d}`$, a specular decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{s}`$, and a residual decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\delta`$, as illustrated in <a href="#fig:shading" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:shading">4</a>. From the shading feature $`\mathbf{t}_\text{shd}`$ at point $`\mathbf{p}`$, the surface decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{f}`$ decodes canonical space normal $`\mathbf{n}^\text{c}`$, albedo $`\mathbf{a}`$, and additional features $`\mathbf{w}`$ for super-resolution,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{n}^\text{c}, \mathbf{a}, \mathbf{w}&= \mathcal{D}_\text{f}(\mathbf{t}_\text{shd}),\;\text{where }\mathbf{t}_\text{shd}=\mathbf{T}_\text{shd}(\mathcal{T}(\mathbf{p})).
\end{align}
```
Different from $`\sigma,\mathbf{a},\mathbf{w}`$ which are the same in zero pose and target pose, the canonical normal needs to be rotated to the target normal $`\mathbf{n}=\mathcal{R}^{-1}(\mathbf{n}^\text{c})`$ with the target-to-canonical rotation field $`\mathcal{R}`$. <a href="#eq:reflect" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="eq:reflect">[eq:reflect]</a> reflects the normal $`\mathbf{n}`$ with the viewing direction $`\mathbf{v}`$ of the sampled ray to obtain a reflected viewing direction $`\mathbf{r}`$. Then, the diffuse decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{d}`$ and the specular decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{s}`$ predict shading coefficients by utilizing these surface attributes with the shading feature $`\mathbf{t}_\text{shd}`$,
``` math
\begin{align}
    k_\text{d} &= \mathcal{D}_\text{d}([\mathbf{t}_\text{shd},\mathbf{n}]),\;\{k_\text{s}(n)\} = \mathcal{D}_\text{s}([\mathbf{t}_\text{shd},\mathbf{r}]),
\end{align}
```
where $`[\cdot,\cdot]`$ denotes a concatenation. We also sample diffuse and specular lightmaps $`\mathbf{S}_\text{d},\{\mathbf{S}_\text{s}(n)\}`$ with the normal $`\mathbf{n}`$ and the reflected viewing direction $`\mathbf{r}`$, respectively, resulting in diffuse and specular shadings $`\mathbf{s}_\text{d},\{\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n)\}`$. To enhance the realism beyond naive Phong shading, we further decode a residual color $`\delta\mathbf{c}`$ with a residual decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\delta`$,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \delta\mathbf{c}&= \mathcal{D}_\delta([\mathbf{a},\mathbf{s}_\text{d},\{\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n)\}]).
\end{align}
```
This allows our shader to combine physically based rendering (PBR) with learnable residuals as the volume color,
``` math
\begin{align}
\label{eq:render}
    \mathbf{c}&= k_\text{d}\mathbf{a}\odot\mathbf{s}_\text{d} + \sum_n k_\text{s}(n)\mathbf{s}_\text{s}(n) + \delta\mathbf{c}.
\end{align}
```
Finally, we feed point-wise density $`\sigma`$, color $`\mathbf{c}`$, and extra features $`\mathbf{w}`$ to a neural renderer and a subsequent super-resolution module to obtain editing result $`\hat{\mathbf{I}}`$.

## Learning Illumination

<figure id="fig:lightmap" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/lightmap_estimator.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Lightmap estimator architecture.</strong> During pre-training with synthetic data, we adopt a U-Net to encode lighting source <span class="math inline"><strong>I</strong><sub>lit</sub></span> and decode pixel-wise normal <span class="math inline"><strong>N</strong></span>. The intermediate feature <span class="math inline"><strong>z</strong><sub>lit</sub></span> is used to decode diffuse and specular lightmaps <span class="math inline"><strong>S</strong><sub>d</sub>, {<strong>S</strong><sub>s</sub>(<em>n</em>)}</span>, querying with embedded lobe features <span class="math inline"><strong>z</strong><sub>d</sub>, {<strong>z</strong><sub>s</sub>(<em>n</em>)}</span>. In joint training with Total-Editing, the normal decoder is detached.</figcaption>
</figure>

With this intrinsic decomposition of our 3D portrait, we can illuminate it using either a portrait image, $`\mathbf{I}_\text{lit}`$, or an HDR environment map, $`\mathbf{I}_\text{HDR}`$. Both lighting sources are converted into lightmaps for sampling by our shader. In addition to the conversion of environment maps introduced in <a href="#subsubsec:prefilter" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="subsubsec:prefilter">3.1.2</a>, we further present our lightmap estimator inspired by  to predict lightmaps from portrait images. As shown in <a href="#fig:lightmap" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:lightmap">5</a>, it leverages a U-Net architecture for encoding lighting source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{lit}`$ and decoding its pixel-wise normal $`\mathbf{N}`$. To estimate lightmaps $`\mathbf{S}_\text{d},\{\mathbf{S}_\text{s}(n)\}\in\mathbb{R}^{H \times W \times 3}`$, diffuse and specular Phong lobes are projected into lobe features $`\mathbf{z}_\text{d},\{\mathbf{z}_\text{s}(n)\}\in\mathbb{R}^{H \times W \times C}`$ with a shared linear layer $`\mathcal{E}_\text{lobe}`$,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{z}_\text{d} &= \mathcal{E}_\text{lobe}\left(\max(0, \mathbf{n}\cdot\mathbf{l})\right), \\
    \mathbf{z}_\text{s}(n) &= \mathcal{E}_\text{lobe}\left(\max(0, (\mathbf{r}\cdot\mathbf{l})^n)\right),
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathbf{n},\mathbf{r}\in[-1,1]^{H \times W \times 3}`$ are query normals and reflected viewing directions, respectively, and $`\mathbf{l}\in[-1,1]^{N \times 3}`$ are quantized light directions over a sphere. Then, a Transformer-based Lightmap decoder $`\mathcal{D}_\text{lit}`$ queries the encoded portrait image $`\mathbf{z}_\text{lit}`$ with these lobe features, producing diffuse and specular lightmaps,
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathbf{S}_\text{d} = \mathcal{D}_\text{lit}(\mathbf{z}_\text{d},\mathbf{z}_\text{lit}),\;\mathbf{S}_\text{s}(n)=\mathcal{D}_\text{lit}(\mathbf{z}_\text{s}(n),\mathbf{z}_\text{lit}).
\end{align}
```

# Experiments

## Experimental Setting

**Datasets.** We jointly train our Total-Editing with synthetic and real data. For the synthetic dataset, we render a multi-view subset and a video-like one. The former includes 50K subjects rendered in 2 environments, with each subject captured from 10 different views. The latter contains 10K subjects rendered across 10 environments, each with 10 varied poses and expressions. Each unique view, pose, or expression is shared across all environments. The whole dataset with roughly 2M images in total will be released to benefit the community. More details available in the Supp. Mat. For real data, we use the VFHQ  dataset, which comprises 15K video clips. We also evaluate our model with its 100-clip test split. All data are at resolution $`512^2`$.

**Evaluation Metrics.** We employ common metrics to evaluate both the synthesis quality and control accuracy of all baseline methods and our model. For image quality, we use PSNR, SSIM, Fréchet Inception Distances (FID)  , and LPIPS  to assess perceptual similarity and distribution alignment between generated images and ground truths. To measure identity preservation, we calculate the cosine similarity (CSIM) between the face recognition features  of generated images and the appearance sources. For expression and pose control accuracy, we use Average Expression Distance (AED) and Average Pose Distance (APD) , derived from a 3DMM estimator .

**Implementation Details.** During pre-training of the lightmap estimator with synthetic data, we utilize the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of $`1 \times 10^{-4}`$ and a batch size of $`32`$, optimizing $`\mathcal{E}_\text{lit},\mathcal{D}_\text{lit},\mathcal{E}_\text{nor}`$ for 500K steps. Subsequently, we plug the lightmap estimator into Total-Editing. Upon the pre-trained $`\mathcal{E}_\text{app},\mathcal{E}_\text{mot},\mathcal{F}_\text{de},\mathcal{F}_\text{re},\mathcal{E}_\text{geo},\mathcal{D}_\text{geo}`$ from Portrait4D-v2 , we learn $`\mathcal{F}_\text{re},\mathcal{E}_\text{geo},\mathcal{D}_\text{geo},\mathcal{E}_\text{shd},\mathcal{D}_\text{shd},\mathcal{E}_\text{lit},\mathcal{D}_\text{lit}`$ using a combination of synthetic data and VFHQ-Train, while keeping the remaining components of Total-Editing fixed. In this phase, training proceeds for 1M steps with an Adam optimizer, a learning rate of $`1 \times 10^{-4}`$, and a batch size of $`12`$. During training, we randomly sample appearance source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$ and motion source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$ of one subject, with the editing target $`\mathbf{I}^*`$ equal to the motion source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$. As for the lighting source, we use the HDR environment map of $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$ for synthetic data and another random frame from the same video for real data. More details can be found in Supp. Mat.

## Comparison Results

<div class="table*">

<span id="tab:main" label="tab:main"></span>

</div>

In <a href="#tab:main" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:main">[tab:main]</a>, we first compare Total-Editing with other one-shot video-based face reenactment methods directly. For baseline methods, we test for standard self-reenactment and cross-reenactment settings, where an appearance source is given, and a motion source is the video of the same subject or another subject, respectively. As for our Total-Editing, we also use the appearance source as the lighting source to let the editing result reflect the source lighting situation. From empirical results in <a href="#fig:qualitative_uneven_lighting" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_uneven_lighting">1</a>, we observe current face reenactment models often couple facial textures with lighting, resulting in unrealistic fixed shading effects on generated results. We thus try to inject illumination into the reenacted faces with a state-of-the-art portrait relighting method , forming two-stage reenactment-relighting pipelines. However, this leads to performance degradation. The reason might be 1) accumulated errors that propagate from the reenacted faces to the relighting model, and 2) the SH lighting representation used in  capturing mainly diffuse shadings. Overall, our end-to-end method outperforms all other approaches in the face reenactment task.

## Ablation study

<span id="tab:ablation_mls" label="tab:ablation_mls"></span>

**Impact of deformation fields.** Rows 2 and 4 of <a href="#tab:ablation_mls" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:ablation_mls">[tab:ablation_mls]</a> investigate the effect of using different deformation fields. The results show that using the MLS-based deformation field effectively enhances synthesis quality and motion control accuracy compared to its SF-based counterparts. These improvements highlight the effectiveness of MLS in maintaining smooth and consistent deformations.

**Impact of illumination awareness.** As shown in every two rows of <a href="#tab:ablation_mls" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:ablation_mls">[tab:ablation_mls]</a> (1$`^\text{st}`$ vs. 2$`^\text{nd}`$ and 3$`^\text{rd}`$ vs. 4$`^\text{th}`$), removing the rotation field applied to canonical normals causes a noticeable decline in model performance. Without this rotation field, the normal directions remain fixed, even as pose and expression change, leaving the model illumination unaware and shadings stuck to the face of animated portraits.

<span id="tab:ablation_data" label="tab:ablation_data"></span>

**Impact of data sources.** Rows 1-3 of <a href="#tab:ablation_data" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:ablation_data">[tab:ablation_data]</a> validate the effectiveness of using both real and synthetic data in training Total-Editing. Synthetic data alone (row 1) enables motion transfer but lacks fidelity due to a distribution gap between synthetic subjects and real-world portraits. Real data alone (row 2) improves realism but leads to an unconstrained lightmap estimator in the end-to-end training stage, resulting in degraded performance. Combining both sources (row 3) achieves optimal results.

**Impact of regularization on real data.** Row 1-3 of <a href="#tab:ablation_data" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:ablation_data">[tab:ablation_data]</a> follow standard reenactment training, where the appearance source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$ and the motion source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$ are sampled from the same video, with $`\mathbf{I}_\text{lit}=\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$. Since $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$ is also the editing target, there is limited penalty for the lightmap estimator to misinterpret albedo as shading, e.g., beards as shadows, resulting in suboptimal performance. To tackle this, we test two types of regularization: enforcing consistency between lightmaps estimated from the appearance and lighting sources (row 4) and randomly sampling the lighting source within the same video clip (row 5). Both learn a more robust lightmap estimator that better decouples albedo from shading, enhancing fidelity for editing results. We choose row 5 as our final scheme for the best performance.

## Qualitative Analysis

<figure id="fig:qualitative_cross" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/qualitative_cross_reenactment.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative comparison of cross-reenactment on VFHQ-Test.</strong> For GPAvatar <span class="citation" data-cites="chu2024gpavatar"></span> (c), Real3DPortrait <span class="citation" data-cites="ye2024real3d"></span> (e), and Portrait4D-v2 <span class="citation" data-cites="deng2024portrait4dv2"></span> (g), we use appearance sources (a) and motion sources (b) as inputs. For additional relighting with PortraitRelighting <span class="citation" data-cites="cai2024real"></span>, we use (a) as the lighting condition. For our Total-Editing, we use (a) as both appearance and lighting sources, and (b) as the motion source.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:qualitative_self" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/qualitative_self_reenactment.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative comparison of self-reenactment on VFHQ-Test.</strong> We employ the same input settings as in <a href="#fig:qualitative_cross" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_cross">6</a>.</figcaption>
</figure>

<a href="#fig:qualitative_cross" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_cross">6</a> compares Total-Editing with other reenactment and reenactment-relighting pipelines for cross-enactment. Face reenactment models tend to carry shading effects with portrait motion, leading to unrealistic results. Non-end-to-end solutions can fail if the reenactment step does not provide a reasonable portrait, compounding errors in subsequent relighting. In contrast, our model achieves consistent, realistic results by handling both motion and lighting control. <a href="#fig:qualitative_self" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_self">7</a> compares Total-Editing with our baseline, Portrait4D-v2 , in terms of self-reenactment, where our method demonstrates better geometry and illumination control abilities. Thanks to illumination awareness, our model synthesizes accurate movement of the light spot on the forehead. Further, we explore the usage of Total-Editing in <a href="#fig:qualitative_relighting" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_relighting">8</a>. Users can edit the appearance, motion, and lighting attributes of a portrait individually while not affecting others. This facilitates applications such as background changing. More visualizations can be found in Supp. Mat.

# Conclusion

We introduce Total-Editing, a geometry-and-illumination-aware portrait editing framework that synthesizes 3D portraits with given appearance, motion, and lighting sources. With intrinsic decomposed neural radiance fields, it achieves precise lighting control using either a portrait image or an HDR environment map. The integration of a MLS-based deformation field further enhances the realism of the generated portraits. Experimental results show that Total-Editing provides superior performance and more flexible applications compared to existing methods.

<figure id="fig:qualitative_relighting" data-latex-placement="t">
<div class="center">
<embed src="figures/qualitative_relighting.pdf" />
</div>
<figcaption><strong>More applications.</strong> Total-Editing enables flexible applications such as animatable portraits with background changing.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Limitation discussion and future work.** The current formulation of Total-Editing does not account for visibility and self-occlusion, making it difficult to handle portraits with accessories, e.g., hats and glasses. However, as suggested in LumiGAN , voxel-wise visibilities can be calculated from the predicted density field and learned in a self-supervised manner. We leave this to future exploration.

# Training Scheme and Objective Functions

We begin by pre-training our lightmap estimator using synthetic data with ground truths. The objective function is
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathcal{L}_\text{pre} = \mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{S}} + \mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{N}},
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{S}}`$ is an L1 loss comparing the predicted and ground truth lightmaps $`\mathbf{S}_\text{d},\{\mathbf{S}_\text{s}(n)\}`$, $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{N}}`$ is a cosine similarity loss between predicted and ground truth normal $`\mathbf{N}`$. After pre-training, we detach the normal decoder $`\mathcal{E}_\text{nor}`$ and integrate the rest of the lightmap estimator with Total-Editing. The entire network is then trained end-to-end using both real and synthetic data. During training, we randomly sample appearance source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{app}`$ and motion source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$ of one subject, with the editing target $`\mathbf{I}^*`$ equal to the motion source $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$. As for the lighting source, we use the HDR environment map of $`\mathbf{I}_\text{mot}`$ for synthetic data and another random frame from the same video clip for real data. In this phase, our reconstruction objective is
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathcal{L}_\text{rec} &= \mathcal{L}_1 + \mathcal{L}_\text{LPIPS} + \mathcal{L}_\text{id} + \mathcal{L}_\text{seg} + \mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{a}} + \mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{n}} + \mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{S}},
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathcal{L}_1`$, $`\mathcal{L}_\text{LPIPS}`$, $`\mathcal{L}_\text{id}`$ are pixel-wise L1, perceptual difference , and negative cosine similarity of face recognition features  between the editing result $`\hat{\mathbf{I}}`$ and the target $`\mathbf{I}^*`$, $`\mathcal{L}_\text{seg}`$ and $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{a}}`$ are L1 losses for the rendered foreground mask and albedo, $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{n}}`$ is a cosine similarity loss for the rendered normal, and $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{S}}`$ is the L1 loss for estimated lightmaps. Note that $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{a}}`$ and $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{S}}`$ are used only for synthetic data, while $`\mathcal{L}_{\mathbf{n}}`$ is also applied to real data with Sapiens  pseudo ground truths. Further, we introduce regularization
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathcal{L}_\text{reg} &= \mathcal{R}_\text{TV} + \mathcal{R}_{\delta} + \mathcal{R}_{\mathbf{n}},
\end{align}
```
where $`\mathcal{R}_\text{TV}`$ is the total variation loss to promote spatial smoothness, $`\mathcal{R}_{\delta}`$ is a L1 regularization for residual color $`\delta\mathbf{c}`$ which constraints it from dominating the render, and
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathcal{R}_{\mathbf{n}} &= \left\lVert 1 - \mathbf{n}\cdot\left(-\frac{\nabla\sigma(\mathbf{p})}{\left\lVert\nabla\sigma(\mathbf{p})\right\rVert_2}\right)\right\rVert_1
\end{align}
```
regularizes normal $`\mathbf{n}`$ to align with the unit negative gradient of density $`\sigma`$. We also apply an adversarial loss $`\mathcal{L}_\text{adv}`$ with a dual discriminator . Finally, the training objective is
``` math
\begin{align}
    \mathcal{L}&= \mathcal{L}_\text{rec} + \mathcal{L}_\text{reg} + \mathcal{L}_\text{adv}.
\end{align}
```

<figure id="fig:lumos_dataset" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/lumos_dataset.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Samples from one identity of the Lumos <span class="citation" data-cites="yeh2022learning"></span> dataset.</strong> We refer to each column as a unique subject, since they have different appearances and accessories.</figcaption>
</figure>

# More Qualitative Results

We present additional face reenactment results on the VFHQ  and HDTF  datasets in <a href="#fig:additional_cross_vfhq,fig:cross_hdtf_p1,fig:cross_hdtf_p2,fig:self_hdtf" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:additional_cross_vfhq,fig:cross_hdtf_p1,fig:cross_hdtf_p2,fig:self_hdtf">[fig:additional_cross_vfhq,fig:cross_hdtf_p1,fig:cross_hdtf_p2,fig:self_hdtf]</a>, demonstrating the effectiveness of Total-Editing in both motion and lighting control. Further, we explore two downstream applications. As shown in <a href="#fig:cross_vfhq_hdri" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:cross_vfhq_hdri">14</a>, Total-Editing enables relighting of animated portraits using HDR environment maps, producing a background replacement effect. In <a href="#fig:cross_vfhq_ffhq" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:cross_vfhq_ffhq">15</a>, Total-Editing can leverage arbitrary portrait images as lighting sources, vividly transferring the illumination effect from one portrait to another.

<figure id="fig:additional_cross_vfhq" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/qualitative_vfhq_cross.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Additional cross-reenactment results on the VFHQ dataset.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

# Dataset Details

Our synthetic dataset is designed to advance research in general portrait editing, offering two primary subsets: a multi-view subset and a video-like subset.

- The multi-view subset comprises 50K subjects, each captured in two distinct environments and viewed from 10 camera angles. This subset provides extensive data for analyzing objects from diverse perspectives and ensuring multi-view consistency. Samples are shown in <a href="#fig:synthetic_multiview" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:synthetic_multiview">16</a>.

- The video-like subset includes 10K subjects, each rendered across 10 environments with varied poses and expressions, making it well-suited for studying motion and temporal changes. Samples are shown in <a href="#fig:synthetic_video" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:synthetic_video">17</a>.

With diverse samples demonstrated in <a href="#fig:synthetic_dataset" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:synthetic_dataset">18</a>, our synthetic dataset consists of 50K subjects and 2M images. It is enriched with ground truth albedo, normal, depth, UV maps, segmentation masks, and HDR environment maps. This dataset addresses critical limitations compared to the existing synthetic datasets. For example, as shown in <a href="#fig:lumos_dataset" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:lumos_dataset">9</a>, the Lumos dataset  captures each subject only from one view, limiting it to tasks like portrait relighting. In contrast, our dataset incorporates multiple viewpoints and subject movements, better simulating real-world spatiotemporal variations. These improvements make our dataset more versatile and effective for downstream applications requiring spatial and/or temporal coherence.

# Evaluation Details

In <a href="#tab:main" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:main">[tab:main]</a>, we exclude both generated and ground truth backgrounds from metric calculations, focusing solely on the quality of the portrait regions. Since the relighting method proposed by Cai et al.  requires additional cropping for input images, we recompose the outputs with original inputs in <a href="#fig:qualitative_cross" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_cross">6</a> for visual consistency. During quantitative comparisons in <a href="#tab:main" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="tab:main">[tab:main]</a>, we only consider the valid areas after cropping. In <a href="#fig:qualitative_relighting" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:qualitative_relighting">8</a>, the backgrounds of 2$`^\text{nd}`$ to 3$`^\text{rd}`$ columns are synthesized by inpainting the lighting source portrait using , while those in the 4$`^\text{th}`$ to 5$`^\text{th}`$ columns are rendered from the corresponding HDR environment maps.

<figure id="fig:cross_hdtf_p1" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/hdtf_cross_p1.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Cross-reenactment results on the HTDF dataset.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:cross_hdtf_p2" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/hdtf_cross_p2.pdf" style="width:97.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Cross-reenactment results on the HTDF dataset (continued).</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:self_hdtf" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/hdtf_self.pdf" style="width:97.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Self-reenactment results on the HTDF dataset.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:cross_vfhq_hdri" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/qualitative_hdri.pdf" style="width:97.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Cross-reenactment results on the VFHQ dataset with HDR environment maps as lighting sources.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:cross_vfhq_ffhq" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/qualitative_ffhq.pdf" style="width:97.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Cross-reenactment results on the VFHQ dataset with portrait images as lighting sources.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:synthetic_multiview" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/synthetic_multiview.pdf" style="width:97.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Multi-view subset of our synthetic data.</strong> It incorporates 50K subjects. Each is rendered in 2 environments with 10 views.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:synthetic_video" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/synthetic_video.pdf" style="width:97.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Video subset of our synthetic data.</strong> It includes 10K subjects. Each is rendered in 10 environments with 10 poses/expressions.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:synthetic_dataset" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/synthetic_dataset.pdf" style="width:97.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>More subjects in our synthetic data.</strong> Subjects are with randomized poses, expressions, hairstyles, skin types, accessories, etc.</figcaption>
</figure>

## References

1. Rameen Abdal, Peihao Zhu, Niloy~J Mitra, and Peter Wonka.
\newblock Styleflow: Attribute-conditioned exploration of stylegan-generated
  images using conditional continuous normalizing flows.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 40\penalty0 (3):\penalty0
  1--21, 2021.
2. Madhav Agarwal et~al.
\newblock Audio-visual face reenactment.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02755}, 2022. [arXiv:2210.02755](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02755)
3. ShahRukh Athar, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Eli Shechtman, and Zhixin Shu.
\newblock Rignerf: Fully controllable neural 3d portraits.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 20364--20373, 2022.
4. Alexander Bergman, Petr Kellnhofer, Wang Yifan, Eric Chan, David Lindell, and
  Gordon Wetzstein.
\newblock Generative neural articulated radiance fields.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  35:\penalty0 19900--19916, 2022.
5. Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter.
\newblock A morphable model for the synthesis of 3d faces.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques}, pages 187--194. ACM
  Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1999.
6. Ziqi Cai, Kaiwen Jiang, Shu-Yu Chen, Yu-Kun Lai, Hongbo Fu, Boxin Shi, and Lin
  Gao.
\newblock Real-time 3d-aware portrait video relighting.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 6221--6231, 2024.
7. Pol Caselles, Eduard Ramon, Jaime Garcia, Xavier Giro-i Nieto, Francesc
  Moreno-Noguer, and Gil Triginer.
\newblock Sira: Relightable avatars from a single image.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on
  applications of computer vision}, pages 775--784, 2023.
8. Eric~R Chan, Connor~Z Lin, Matthew~A Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini
  De~Mello, Orazio Gallo, Leonidas~J Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis,
  et~al.
\newblock Efficient geometry-aware 3d generative adversarial networks.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition}, pages 16123--16133, 2022.
9. Xuangeng Chu and Tatsuya Harada.
\newblock Generalizable and animatable gaussian head avatar.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.07971}, 2024. [arXiv:2410.07971](https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.07971)
10. Xuangeng Chu, Yu Li, Ailing Zeng, Tianyu Yang, Lijian Lin, Yunfei Liu, and
  Tatsuya Harada.
\newblock Gpavatar: Generalizable and precise head avatar from image (s).
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.10215}, 2024. [arXiv:2401.10215](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.10215)
11. Robert~L Cook and Kenneth~E. Torrance.
\newblock A reflectance model for computer graphics.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 1\penalty0 (1):\penalty0
  7--24, 1982.
12. Paul Debevec, Tim Hawkins, Chris Tchou, Haarm-Pieter Duiker, Westley Sarokin,
  and Mark Sagar.
\newblock Acquiring the reflectance field of a human face.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques}, pages 145--156, 2000.
13. Boyang Deng, Yifan Wang, and Gordon Wetzstein.
\newblock Lumigan: Unconditional generation of relightable 3d human faces.
\newblock In \emph{2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV)}, pages
  302--312. IEEE, 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
14. Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
\newblock Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep face recognition.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition}, pages 4690--4699, 2019{\natexlab{a}}.
15. Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong.
\newblock Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From
  single image to image set.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition workshops}, pages 0--0, 2019{\natexlab{b}}.
16. Yu Deng, Duomin Wang, Xiaohang Ren, Xingyu Chen, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Portrait4d: Learning one-shot 4d head avatar synthesis using
  synthetic data.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 7119--7130, 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
17. Yu Deng, Duomin Wang, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Portrait4d-v2: Pseudo multi-view data creates better 4d head
  synthesizer.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13570}, 2024{\natexlab{c}}. [arXiv:2403.13570](https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.13570)
18. Fan Fei, Yean Cheng, Yongjie Zhu, Qian Zheng, Si Li, Gang Pan, and Boxin Shi.
\newblock Split: Single portrait lighting estimation via a tetrad of face
  intrinsics.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
  Intelligence}, 2023.
19. Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, and Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Dynamic neural radiance fields for monocular 4d facial avatar
  reconstruction.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 8649--8658, 2021.
20. Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David Warde-Farley,
  Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
\newblock Generative adversarial nets.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 27, 2014.
21. {Google}.
\newblock Project starline.
\newblock \url{https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Project_Starline}, 2021.
22. Mingtao Guo, Guanyu Xing, and Yanli Liu.
\newblock High-fidelity relightable monocular portrait animation with
  lighting-controllable video diffusion model.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19894}, 2025. [arXiv:2502.19894](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.19894)
23. Wolfgang Heidrich and Hans-Peter Seidel.
\newblock Realistic, hardware-accelerated shading and lighting.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques}, pages 171--178, 1999.
24. Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
  Hochreiter.
\newblock Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash
  equilibrium.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 30, 2017.
25. Fa-Ting Hong, Longhao Zhang, Li Shen, and Dan Xu.
\newblock Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head video
  generation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition}, pages 3397--3406, 2022.
26. Andrew Hou, Ze Zhang, Michel Sarkis, Ning Bi, Yiying Tong, and Xiaoming Liu.
\newblock Towards high fidelity face relighting with realistic shadows.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition}, pages 14719--14728, 2021.
27. Andrew Hou, Michel Sarkis, Ning Bi, Yiying Tong, and Xiaoming Liu.
\newblock Face relighting with geometrically consistent shadows.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition}, pages 4217--4226, 2022.
28. Chaonan Ji, Tao Yu, Kaiwen Guo, Jingxin Liu, and Yebin Liu.
\newblock Geometry-aware single-image full-body human relighting.
\newblock In \emph{European Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 388--405.
  Springer, 2022.
29. Kaiwen Jiang, Shu-Yu Chen, Hongbo Fu, and Lin Gao.
\newblock Nerffacelighting: Implicit and disentangled face lighting
  representation leveraging generative prior in neural radiance fields.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 42\penalty0 (3):\penalty0 1--18,
  2023.
30. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten, Jaakko Lehtinen, and
  Timo Aila.
\newblock Analyzing and improving the image quality of stylegan.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition}, pages 8110--8119, 2020.
31. Jan Kautz, Pere-Pau V{\'a}zquez, Wolfgang Heidrich, and Hans-Peter Seidel.
\newblock A unified approach to prefiltered environment maps.
\newblock In \emph{Rendering Techniques 2000: Proceedings of the Eurographics
  Workshop in Brno, Czech Republic, June 26--28, 2000 11}, pages 185--196.
  Springer, 2000.
32. Taras Khakhulin, Vanessa Sklyarova, Victor Lempitsky, and Egor Zakharov.
\newblock Realistic one-shot mesh-based head avatars.
\newblock In \emph{European Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 345--362.
  Springer, 2022.
33. Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su Zhaoen, Austin James,
  Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and Shunsuke Saito.
\newblock Sapiens: Foundation for human vision models.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12569}, 2024. [arXiv:2408.12569](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.12569)
34. Hoon Kim, Minje Jang, Wonjun Yoon, Jisoo Lee, Donghyun Na, and Sanghyun Woo.
\newblock Switchlight: Co-design of physics-driven architecture and
  pre-training framework for human portrait relighting.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 25096--25106, 2024.
35. Yann LeCun, L{\'e}on Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner.
\newblock Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition.
\newblock \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE}, 86\penalty0 (11):\penalty0
  2278--2324, 1998.
36. Weichuang Li, Longhao Zhang, Dong Wang, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Mulin Chen,
  Bang Zhang, Zhongjian Wang, Liefeng Bo, and Xuelong Li.
\newblock One-shot high-fidelity talking-head synthesis with deformable neural
  radiance field.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 17969--17978, 2023.
37. Xueting Li, Shalini De~Mello, Sifei Liu, Koki Nagano, Umar Iqbal, and Jan
  Kautz.
\newblock Generalizable one-shot 3d neural head avatar.
\newblock \emph{Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 36, 2024.
38. Connor~Z Lin, David~B Lindell, Eric~R Chan, and Gordon Wetzstein.
\newblock 3d gan inversion for controllable portrait image animation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13441}, 2022. [arXiv:2203.13441](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.13441)
39. Min-Hui Lin, Mahesh Reddy, Guillaume Berger, Michel Sarkis, Fatih Porikli, and
  Ning Bi.
\newblock Edgerelight360: Text-conditioned 360-degree hdr image generation for
  real-time on-device video portrait relighting.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 831--840, 2024.
40. Zhiyuan Ma, Xiangyu Zhu, Guo-Jun Qi, Zhen Lei, and Lei Zhang.
\newblock Otavatar: One-shot talking face avatar with controllable tri-plane
  rendering.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 16901--16910, 2023.
41. Yiqun Mei, He Zhang, Xuaner Zhang, Jianming Zhang, Zhixin Shu, Yilin Wang,
  Zijun Wei, Shi Yan, HyunJoon Jung, and Vishal~M Patel.
\newblock Lightpainter: interactive portrait relighting with freehand scribble.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 195--205, 2023.
42. Yiqun Mei, Yu Zeng, He Zhang, Zhixin Shu, Xuaner Zhang, Sai Bi, Jianming Zhang,
  HyunJoon Jung, and Vishal~M Patel.
\newblock Holo-relighting: Controllable volumetric portrait relighting from a
  single image.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 4263--4273, 2024.
43. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T Barron, Ravi
  Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
  synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{European conference on computer vision}, pages 405--421.
  Springer, 2020.
44. Thomas Nestmeyer, Jean-Fran{\c{c}}ois Lalonde, Iain Matthews, and Andreas
  Lehrmann.
\newblock Learning physics-guided face relighting under directional light.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 5124--5133, 2020.
45. Rohit Pandey, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Chloe Legendre, Christian Haene, Sofien
  Bouaziz, Christoph Rhemann, Paul~E Debevec, and Sean~Ryan Fanello.
\newblock Total relighting: learning to relight portraits for background
  replacement.
\newblock \emph{ACM Trans. Graph.}, 40\penalty0 (4):\penalty0 43--1, 2021.
46. Foivos~Paraperas Papantoniou, Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, and
  Stefanos Zafeiriou.
\newblock Relightify: Relightable 3d faces from a single image via diffusion
  models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 8806--8817, 2023.
47. Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan~T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan~B.
  Goldman, Steven~M. Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla.
\newblock Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV)}, pages 5865--5874, 2021{\natexlab{a}}.
48. Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan~T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz,
  Dan~B. Goldman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven~M. Seitz.
\newblock Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for topologically
  varying neural radiance fields.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 40\penalty0 (6):\penalty0
  1--12, 2021{\natexlab{b}}.
49. Bui~Tuong Phong.
\newblock Illumination for computer generated pictures.
\newblock In \emph{Seminal graphics: pioneering efforts that shaped the field},
  pages 95--101. 1998.
50. Puntawat Ponglertnapakorn, Nontawat Tritrong, and Supasorn Suwajanakorn.
\newblock Difareli: Diffusion face relighting.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 22646--22657, 2023.
51. Haonan Qiu, Zhaoxi Chen, Yuming Jiang, Hang Zhou, Xiangyu Fan, Lei Yang, Wayne
  Wu, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Relitalk: Relightable talking portrait generation from a single
  video.
\newblock \emph{International Journal of Computer Vision}, pages 1--16, 2024.
52. Ravi Ramamoorthi and Pat Hanrahan.
\newblock An efficient representation for irradiance environment maps.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 28th annual conference on Computer
  graphics and interactive techniques}, pages 497--500, 2001.
53. Anurag Ranjan, Kwang~Moo Yi, Jen-Hao~Rick Chang, and Oncel Tuzel.
\newblock Facelit: Neural 3d relightable faces.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 8619--8628, 2023.
54. Pramod Rao, Gereon Fox, Abhimitra Meka, Mallikarjun BR, Fangneng Zhan, Tim
  Weyrich, Bernd Bickel, Hanspeter Pfister, Wojciech Matusik, Mohamed Elgharib,
  et~al.
\newblock Lite2relight: 3d-aware single image portrait relighting.
\newblock In \emph{ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers}, pages 1--12, 2024.
55. Mengwei Ren, Wei Xiong, Jae~Shin Yoon, Zhixin Shu, Jianming Zhang, HyunJoon
  Jung, Guido Gerig, and He Zhang.
\newblock Relightful harmonization: Lighting-aware portrait background
  replacement.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 6452--6462, 2024.
56. Yang Ren, Jie Liu, Xinwei Jiang, Xiaodan Liang, and Liang Lin.
\newblock Adaptive perturbation learning for unsupervised disentangling of
  appearance and motion.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 14318--14327, 2021.
57. Shunsuke Saito, Gabriel Schwartz, Tomas Simon, Junxuan Li, and Giljoo Nam.
\newblock Relightable gaussian codec avatars.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 130--141, 2024.
58. Scott Schaefer, Travis McPhail, and Joe Warren.
\newblock Image deformation using moving least squares.
\newblock In \emph{ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Papers}, pages 533--540. 2006.
59. Aliaksandr Siarohin, St{\'e}phane Lathuili{\`e}re, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa
  Ricci, and Nicu Sebe.
\newblock First order motion model for image animation.
\newblock \emph{Advances in neural information processing systems}, 32, 2019.
60. Tiancheng Sun, Jonathan~T Barron, Yun-Ta Tsai, Zexiang Xu, Xueming Yu, Graham
  Fyffe, Christoph Rhemann, Jay Busch, Paul Debevec, and Ravi Ramamoorthi.
\newblock Single image portrait relighting.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 38\penalty0 (4):\penalty0
  1--12, 2019.
61. Tiancheng Sun, Kai-En Lin, Sai Bi, Zexiang Xu, and Ravi Ramamoorthi.
\newblock Nelf: Neural light-transport field for portrait view synthesis and
  relighting.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.12351}, 2021. [arXiv:2107.12351](https://arxiv.org/abs/2107.12351)
62. Roman Suvorov, Elizaveta Logacheva, Anton Mashikhin, Anastasia Remizova,
  Arsenii Ashukha, Aleksei Silvestrov, Naejin Kong, Harshith Goka, Kiwoong
  Park, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Resolution-robust large mask inpainting with fourier convolutions.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF winter conference on
  applications of computer vision}, pages 2149--2159, 2022.
63. Junshu Tang, Bo Zhang, Binxin Yang, Ting Zhang, Dong Chen, Lizhuang Ma, and
  Fang Wen.
\newblock {3DFaceShop}: Explicitly controllable 3d-aware portrait generation.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics},
  2023.
64. Justus Thies, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, Marc Stamminger, Christian Theobalt, and
  Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Neural voice puppetry: Audio-driven facial reenactment.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 9382--9391, 2019.
65. Edgar Tretschk, Ayush Tewari, Vladislav Golyanik, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, and
  Christian Theobalt.
\newblock Non-rigid neural radiance fields: Reconstruction and novel view
  synthesis of a deforming scene from monocular video.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision (ICCV)}, pages 12959--12970, 2021.
66. Alex Trevithick, Matthew Chan, Michael Stengel, Eric Chan, Chao Liu, Zhiding
  Yu, Sameh Khamis, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Koki Nagano.
\newblock Real-time radiance fields for single-image portrait view synthesis.
\newblock 2023.
67. Duomin Wang, Yu Deng, Zixin Yin, Heung-Yeung Shum, and Baoyuan Wang.
\newblock Progressive disentangled representation learning for fine-grained
  controllable talking head synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 17979--17989, 2023.
68. Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu.
\newblock One-shot free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video
  conferencing.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.15126}, 2020{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2011.15126](https://arxiv.org/abs/2011.15126)
69. Zhibo Wang, Xin Yu, Ming Lu, Quan Wang, Chen Qian, and Feng Xu.
\newblock Single image portrait relighting via explicit multiple reflectance
  channel modeling.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 39\penalty0 (6):\penalty0
  1--13, 2020{\natexlab{b}}.
70. Andreas Wenger, Andrew Gardner, Chris Tchou, Jonas Unger, Tim Hawkins, and Paul
  Debevec.
\newblock Performance relighting and reflectance transformation with
  time-multiplexed illumination.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 24\penalty0 (3):\penalty0
  756--764, 2005.
71. Liangbin Xie, Xintao Wang, Honglun Zhang, Chao Dong, and Ying Shan.
\newblock Vfhq: A high-quality dataset and benchmark for video face
  super-resolution.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition}, pages 657--666, 2022.
72. Hongyi Xu, Guoxian Song, Zihang Jiang, Jianfeng Zhang, Yichun Shi, Jing Liu,
  Wanchun Ma, Jiashi Feng, and Linjie Luo.
\newblock Omniavatar: Geometry-guided controllable 3d head synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
  and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 12814--12824, 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
73. Zhongcong Xu, Jianfeng Zhang, Junhao Liew, Wenqing Zhang, Song Bai, Jiashi
  Feng, and Mike~Zheng Shou.
\newblock {PV3D}: A 3d generative model for portrait video generation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference on
  Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
74. Zhenhui Ye, Tianyun Zhong, Yi Ren, Jiaqi Yang, Weichuang Li, Jiawei Huang,
  Ziyue Jiang, Jinzheng He, Rongjie Huang, Jinglin Liu, et~al.
\newblock Real3d-portrait: One-shot realistic 3d talking portrait synthesis.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08503}, 2024. [arXiv:2401.08503](../2024/2401.08503.md)
75. Yu-Ying Yeh, Koki Nagano, Sameh Khamis, Jan Kautz, Ming-Yu Liu, and Ting-Chun
  Wang.
\newblock Learning to relight portrait images via a virtual light stage and
  synthetic-to-real adaptation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 41\penalty0 (6):\penalty0
  1--21, 2022.
76. Wangbo Yu, Yanbo Fan, Yong Zhang, Xuan Wang, Fei Yin, Yunpeng Bai, Yan-Pei Cao,
  Ying Shan, Yang Wu, Zhongqian Sun, et~al.
\newblock Nofa: Nerf-based one-shot facial avatar reconstruction.
\newblock In \emph{ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings}, pages 1--12,
  2023{\natexlab{a}}.
77. Zhenyu Yu et~al.
\newblock Dinet: Deformation inpainting network for realistic face visually
  dubbing on high resolution video.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.10212}, 2023{\natexlab{b}}. [arXiv:2304.10212](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.10212)
78. Egor Zakharov, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Burkov, and Victor Lempitsky.
\newblock Few-shot adversarial learning of realistic neural talking head
  models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 9459--9468, 2019.
79. Longwen Zhang, Qixuan Zhang, Minye Wu, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu.
\newblock Neural video portrait relighting in real-time via consistency
  modeling.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision}, pages 802--812, 2021{\natexlab{a}}.
80. Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei~A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang.
\newblock The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual
  metric.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 586--595, 2018.
81. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie Fan.
\newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution
  audio-visual dataset.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
  and pattern recognition}, pages 3661--3670, 2021{\natexlab{b}}.
82. Hao Zhou, Sunil Hadap, Kalyan Sunkavalli, and David~W Jacobs.
\newblock Deep single-image portrait relighting.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
  computer vision}, pages 7194--7202, 2019.
83. Yuanchen Zhu and Steven~J Gortler.
\newblock 3d deformation using moving least squares.
\newblock 2007.
84. Peiye Zhuang, Liqian Ma, Sanmi Koyejo, and Alexander Schwing.
\newblock Controllable radiance fields for dynamic face synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on 3D
  Vision (3DV)}, 2022.
