---
arxiv_id: '2508.09913'
title: 'SpeechForensics: Audio-Visual Speech Representation Learning for Face Forgery
  Detection'
authors:
- Yachao Liang
- Min Yu
- Gang Li
- Jianguo Jiang
- Boquan Li
- Feng Yu
- Ning Zhang
- Xiang Meng
- Weiqing Huang
submitted: '2025-08-13'
categories:
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.09913
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 9/73
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:13:40+00:00'
references_parsed: 73
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Experiments

## Experimental Setup

We evaluate our methods across three distinct video forgery datasets: `Faceforensics++` (FF++) , `FakeAVCeleb`  and `KoDF` . Note that Only the FakeAVCeleb contains videos belong to the Real-Visual-Fake-Audio category, and we exclude them as we focus on the facial forgery and to maintain fairness of experiments.

**Faceforensics++** contains 1,000 real videos alongside 4,000 fake videos, created via four different manipulation methods. These include face swapping methods (`DeepFakes` , `FaceSwap` ), and two face reenactment methods (`Face2Face`  and `NeuralTextures` ). For our evaluation, We re-download videos using the provided YouTube IDs and extract audio segments from the provided frame locations. Contrary to the common practice of treating `Faceforensics++` as a visual-only dataset, we paired the original videos with their corresponding audio segments to create an audio-visual test dataset. After excluding videos unavailable or containing non-corresponding mouth movements and voices, we selected 500 videos from each category for testing.

**FakeAVCeleb** contains 500 real videos and 19,500 fake videos. It is derived from `VoxCeleb2`  and represents diverse ethnic backgrounds, ages and genders. This dataset involves four manipulation techniques, `Faceswap`  and `Faceswap GAN` (`FSGAN`)   for face swapping, `SV2TTS`  for real-time cloning voice, and `Wav2Lip`  for audio-driven facial reenactment.

**KoDF**  is a large-scale Korean forgery datasets, containing 62,166 real videos and 175,776 fake videos. For our evaluation, we focus on fake videos crafted using four distinct manipulation techniques: `FaceSwap` , `DeepFaceLab` , `FOMM` , `Audio-driven` (including ATFHP  and `Wav2Lip` ). From each of these categories, we randomly select 1,000 videos to compile our testing set.

We first utilize FFmpeg  to convert all videos into 25fps and audio into 16kHz sample rate. For each video clip, we initiate the process by identifying faces using `RetinaFace`  and subsequently extract facial landmarks with `FAN` . We then align the frames using affine transformations, and crop $`96\times96`$ regions centered around the mouth, as indicated by the landmarks. For the audio part, we extract `MFCC` features from wavform every 10ms, and we concatenate 4 adjacent audio frames to align with visual modality.

The audio-visual speech representation model consists of visual frontend, audio frontend and masked predictor. Following AVHuBert , We use the Resnet-18 2D+3D  as the visual frontend. And the audio frontend contains only a single linear projection layer to avoid the over-reliance issue on the audio stream . The masked predictor is implemented by the standard transformer encoder. Further details can be found in <a href="#appendix:architecture" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="appendix:architecture">[appendix:architecture]</a>.

The model is trained on `LRS3`  and `VoxCeleb2`  datasets, which contain 433 and 1326 hours of videos respectively. The training process adhere to the methodology outlined by . For the purp- oses of our experiments, unless otherwise noted, we utilize a publicly available pretrained model [^1].

## Quantitative Comparisons

We compare our method with several state-of-the-art detectors, including `Xception` , `Patch-based` , `Face X-ray` , `LipForensics` , `FTCN` , `RealForensics`  and `AVAD` . Moreover, we also construct a model, consisting of two Resnet 2D  models, to extract only phonetic-level (5 frames) speech information for comparison, And we dub it `SpeechForensics-Local`. See <a href="#appendix:baselines" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="appendix:baselines">[appendix:baselines]</a> for more details about above detectors.

We undertake extensive experiments focusing on the generalization and robustness of detectors. In line with established practices in the field , we utilize the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) to gauge the efficacy of our method at the video level. Unless otherwise specified, we take the fixed time offset assumption.

<span id="cross-manipulation" label="cross-manipulation"></span> In real-world situations, detectors frequently encounter novel manipulation techniques, underscoring the necessity for these systems to possess robust generalization capabilities against unseen manipulations. To assess our method’s ability to generalize across different manipulation methods, we conducted evaluations on the widely recognized FF++ high-quality (HQ) dataset. For supervised methods, the experiments adopt the leave-one-out strategy, in line with established practices . It is noteworthy that the settings for both cross-manipulation and cross-dataset are equivalent for unsupervised methods, , AVAD  and our method.

<div class="wraptable">

r7.2cm

</div>

The AUC results presented in <a href="#table:cross_manipulation" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="table:cross_manipulation">[table:cross_manipulation]</a> demonstrate that our method either matches or exceeds performance across different categories, notably without utilizing any forgery samples. Remarkably, our approach achieves perfect results (100%) with the two face reenactment methods, `Face2Face` and `NeuralTextures`. However, the performance on `FaceSwap` (91.1%) is slightly lower compared to the other categories, a trend that aligns with findings from related methods such as `LipForensics` and `RealForensics` ). This could be attributed to `FaceSwap`’s use of target face landmarks for generating source faces, which might result in more precise lip shapes. Nonetheless, our method demonstrates the significant capability in detecting such forgeries through contextual analysis, indicating its effectiveness against diverse manipulation techniques. Notably, our method significantly outperforms `AVAD`, which nearly produces random results. And we note that `SpeechForensics-Local` also achieves considerable performance on this dataset, although modeling local speech information.

We further extend our evaluation to include a cross-dataset comparison, aligning with the practise in prior works . This involves testing the performance of our method on the unseen datasets `FakeAVCeleb`  and `KoDF`, with the supervised models initially trained on the `FF`++ dataset. In addition, we also report the results of every category within the `FakeAVCeleb` dataset, which is segmented into five categories based on the manipulation techniques used `Faceswap`  (FS), `FSGAN` , `Wav2Lip`  (WL), `Faceswap-Wav2Lip` (FS-WL) and `FSGAN-Wav2Lip` (FSGAN-WL), with the latter two categories indicating the combined use of manipulation methods.

<div class="table*">

</div>

The results in <a href="#table:cross_dataset" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="table:cross_dataset">[table:cross_dataset]</a> show that our method significantly outperforms both supervised and unsupervised counterparts in the cross-dataset setting, outperforming previous state-of-the-art method, RealForensics, by 8.8% on FakeAVCeleb and 7.4% on KoDF. It is worth noting that `SpeechForensics-Local` fails to detect fake videos generated by `Wav2Lip`, as we mentioned above, suggesting the key role of global temporal information for forgery video detection. Conversely, `AVAD`  shows promise in detecting forgeries generated by `Wav2Lip` , though its performance on other types of forgery is yet to be fully assessed. Our approach, in contrast, delivers exceptional performance across all forgery types, achieving a perfect 100% on `Wav2Lip`-manipulated video. This underscores the fact that accurate lip synchronization at a local level does not necessarily imply global semantic integrity. We also provide more multimodal experiment results in <a href="#appendix:more_comparisons" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="appendix:more_comparisons">[appendix:more_comparisons]</a>.

Considering the linguistic diversity encountered in real-world video content, we expand our evaluation to assess the cross-language generalization capabilities of our approach. To categorize the languages present in the FF++ dataset, we utilize `Whisper`  for language detection and subsequently split the videos into various language categories: including *English* (EN), *Arabic* (AR), *Spanish* (ES), *Russian* (RU), *Ukrainian* (UK), *Tagalog* (TL) and others. The results, presented in <a href="#table:cross_language" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="table:cross_language">[table:cross_language]</a>, illustrate the AUC scores achieved for each language category. Our findings indicate that our method maintains effective performance across different languages,

<div class="wraptable">

r8cm

</div>

even though it was originally trained on datasets predominantly in *English*. This outcome underscores the versatility of the audio-visual speech representations learned by our model, demonstrating their language-agnostic nature and highlighting the method’s potential applicability in diverse linguistic contexts.

Considering the prevalence of image post-processing operations on social media platforms, such as compression, the robustness of detection systems emerges as a crucial challenge. In line with previous studies , we evaluate the robustness of our method against various perturbations in the FF++ dataset, and these include Color saturation change, Color contrast change, Block-wise distortion, Gaussian noise, Gaussian blur, Pixelation and Video compression, each applied at 5 different intensity levels as in .

<figure id="fig:robustness" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/robustness.eps" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption><strong>Robustness to unseen perturbations.</strong> Video-level AUC scores (%) are reported under different perturbations. Each perturbation contains five intensity levels <span class="citation" data-cites="jiang2020deeperforensics"></span>. “Average” denotes the mean of each perturbation under each intensity level.</figcaption>
</figure>

The results in <a href="#fig:robustness" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:robustness">1</a> compare the performance of our method against five supervised baselines under these conditions. It can be found that detectors primarily relying on low-level texture features, such as `Face X-ray` , `Xception`  and `FTCN` , are vulnerable to most of the common perturbations. Notably, while `Face X-ray` and `Xception` show diminished effectiveness against perturbations that attenuate high-frequency content (e.g., *blur*, *compression*), `FTCN` is particularly sensitive to perturbations that disrupt temporal coherence (e.g., *noise*).

Besides, the three video-based methods, FTCN , LipForensics  and RealForensics , have all shown sensitivity to Block-wise distortion, suggesting they rely on low-level temporal features to some extent. Conversely, our method demonstrates exceptional robustness against all types of perturbations. Moreover, our approach consistently outperforms `LipForensics`, which also models lip movements, across various corruption scenarios, although starting from a lower point (97.6% vs 99.6%). This indicates that our method is capable of harnessing more potent semantic representations for the purpose of forgery detection, despite being trained exclusively on real data. We provide perturbation examples and more results in <a href="#appendix:robustness" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="appendix:robustness">[appendix:robustness]</a>.

## Qualitative Results

<figure id="fig:visual_distribution" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="figures/visual_distribution.eps" />
<figcaption><strong>Visualized analysis.</strong> Cosine similarity distributions of audio and visual speech representations for real videos and fake videos generated by different manipulation methods.</figcaption>
</figure>

To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct an in-depth visual analysis utilizing `FF`++ and `FakeAVCeleb` datasets. Specifically, we included all forgery categories from FF++, , `Deepfakes`, `FaceSwap`, `Face2Face` and `NeuralTextures`. From the `FakeAVCeleb` dataset, we focused on manipulations made with `FSGAN` and `Wav2Lip`, selecting a random sample of 500 videos. As a result, our experiment covers a total of six types of forgery.

For each type of forgery, we calculate the cosine similarity between visual and corresponding audio speech representations extracted from videos. <a href="#fig:visual_distribution" data-reference-type="ref+Label" data-reference="fig:visual_distribution">2</a> shows the cosine similarity distribution for each category. As we can see, almost all types of fake videos are clearly differentiated from real videos around a cosine similarity threshold of 0.3. An interesting finding is that our method exhibits exceptional performance on face reenactment techniques, , `Face2Face`, `NeuralTextures` and `Wav2Lip`, likely due to these methods prioritizing overall visual fidelity at the expense of accurate lip movements. More visualized results are in <a href="#appendix:visualization" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="appendix:visualization">[appendix:visualization]</a>.

<figure id="fig:interpretability" data-latex-placement="tb">
<embed src="figures/interpretability.eps" />
<figcaption><strong>Interpretative analysis.</strong> The transcriptions are based on audio and visual speech representations of real and different types of fake videos. We show the transcriptions of each type of video containing the same audio.</figcaption>
</figure>

Exploring another intriguing aspect, we delve into understanding how our method functions and what the derived audio-visual representations signify. To shed light on this, we conduct an interpretative analysis on the `FF`++. Specifically, we transcribe the extracted representations using an audio-visual speech recognition model as proposed by , fine-tuned for lipreading with the pretrained audio-visual speech representation model. This enabled us to transcribe specific speech content from both the lip movements and corresponding audio segments in real and fake videos, as shown in <a href="#fig:interpretability" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:interpretability">3</a>. Note only the mouth region sequences are fed into the model to get the transcriptions. As can be seen, the sentence transcribed from real lip movement frames is close to the sentence transcribed from audio. In contrast, lip movements in fake videos frequently result in nonsensical or chaotic transcriptions. It suggests that these audio and visual speech representations indeed contain semantic information, which can be used for forgery detection.

## Ablation study

Given that our model accommodates video clips of varying lengths, we investigated how this aspect impacts the performance of our method on the FF++ dataset. For this purpose, we selected `FaceSwap` and `Face2Face` as two emblematic types of forgeries and segmented videos into various durations, ranging from 1 second to 20 seconds, while maintaining consistency in all other hyperparameters. Results in <a href="#fig:video_length" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:video_length">[fig:video_length]</a> indicate a clear trend: the performance of our method is continuously enhanced with the extension of the video length to 16 seconds, suggesting long-range temporal inconsistencies exist in forgery videos. While previous detectors, ,FTCN  and RealForensics , can only utilize short-range temporal features, resulting in their suboptimal performance.

<figure id="table:ablation_model">
<div class="minipage">
<p><embed src="figures/video_length.eps" style="width:98.0%" /> <span id="fig:video_length" data-label="fig:video_length"></span></p>
</div>
<div class="minipage">
<p><span id="table:ablation_model" data-label="table:ablation_model"></span></p>
</div>
</figure>

We also study the effect of different time offset assumptions between audio and visual streams, , fixed and dynamic. As shown in <a href="#table:ablation_model" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="table:ablation_model">4</a>, the dynamic based method achieves slightly better performance based on the fixed time offset assumption. A reasonable explanation is that, compared to real videos, the time offsets of fake videos will be more inconsistent due to the uncertainty of the forgery process. And the DTW algorithm makes fake videos have higher matching scores, which is unfavorable to the forgery detection. Furthermore, we investigate the influence of different maximum offset $`\tau`$, corresponding sliding-window length $`2\tau+1`$. As <a href="#fig:video_length" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:video_length">[fig:video_length]</a> shows, increasing window length brings improved performance, reaching a maximum of around 31.

We further evaluate the effect of different models and training datasets. For AVHuBERT , we use models with two configurations: BASE, which comprises 12 transformer blocks, and LARGE, which includes 24 transformer blocks. Each configuration was trained on two datasets: `LRS3` alone and a combination of `LRS3` and `VoxCeleb2`, respectively. Furthermore, we evaluate another model, VATLM , which also fits our framework but incorporates text modality. The experimental results on `FF`++ and `FakeAVCeleb` are shown in <a href="#table:ablation_model" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="table:ablation_model">4</a>. Results show larger models and more training data both boost the performance of our approach. While compared with model size, the influence introduced by datasets is more pronounced. And both AVHuBERT and VATLM obtain remarkable results.

[^1]: <https://github.com/facebookresearch/av_hubert>

## References

1. Deepfakes.
\newblock \url{https://github.com/deepfakes/faceswap}.
\newblock [Accessed: 2024-4-25].
2. Deepfakesfaceswap.
\newblock \url{https://github.com/deepfakes/faceswap}.
\newblock [Accessed: 2024-4-25].
3. Faceswap.
\newblock \url{https://github.com/MarekKowalski/FaceSwap}.
\newblock [Accessed: 2024-4-25].
4. Darius Afchar, Vincent Nozick, Junichi Yamagishi, and Isao Echizen.
\newblock Mesonet: a compact facial video forgery detection network.
\newblock In {\em 2018 IEEE international workshop on information forensics and
  security (WIFS)}, pages 1--7. IEEE, 2018.
5. Triantafyllos Afouras, Yuki~M Asano, Francois Fagan, Andrea Vedaldi, and
  Florian Metze.
\newblock Self-supervised object detection from audio-visual correspondence.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 10575--10586, 2022.
6. Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon~Son Chung, Andrew Senior, Oriol Vinyals, and Andrew
  Zisserman.
\newblock Deep audio-visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence},
  44(12):8717--8727, 2018.
7. Triantafyllos Afouras, Joon~Son Chung, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Lrs3-ted: a large-scale dataset for visual speech recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1809.00496}, 2018. [arXiv:1809.00496](https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.00496)
8. Irene Amerini, Leonardo Galteri, Roberto Caldelli, and Alberto Del~Bimbo.
\newblock Deepfake video detection through optical flow based cnn.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition Workshops}, pages 0--0, 2019.
9. Weiming Bai, Yufan Liu, Zhipeng Zhang, Bing Li, and Weiming Hu.
\newblock Aunet: Learning relations between action units for face forgery
  detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 24709--24719, 2023.
10. Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos.
\newblock How far are we from solving the 2d \& 3d face alignment problem?(and
  a dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks).
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer
  vision}, pages 1021--1030, 2017.
11. Zhixi Cai, Shreya Ghosh, Kalin Stefanov, Abhinav Dhall, Jianfei Cai, Hamid
  Rezatofighi, Reza Haffari, and Munawar Hayat.
\newblock Marlin: Masked autoencoder for facial video representation learning.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 1493--1504, 2023.
12. Lucy Chai, David Bau, Ser-Nam Lim, and Phillip Isola.
\newblock What makes fake images detectable? understanding properties that
  generalize.
\newblock In {\em Computer Vision--ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
  Glasgow, UK, August 23--28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XXVI 16}, pages 103--120.
  Springer, 2020.
13. Liang Chen, Yong Zhang, Yibing Song, Lingqiao Liu, and Jue Wang.
\newblock Self-supervised learning of adversarial example: Towards good
  generalizations for deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 18710--18719, 2022.
14. Harry Cheng, Yangyang Guo, Tianyi Wang, Qi~Li, Xiaojun Chang, and Liqiang Nie.
\newblock Voice-face homogeneity tells deepfake.
\newblock {\em ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications and
  Applications}, 20(3):1--22, 2023.
15. Komal Chugh, Parul Gupta, Abhinav Dhall, and Ramanathan Subramanian.
\newblock Not made for each other-audio-visual dissonance-based deepfake
  detection and localization.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on
  multimedia}, pages 439--447, 2020.
16. Joon~Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05622}, 2018. [arXiv:1806.05622](https://arxiv.org/abs/1806.05622)
17. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Computer Vision--ACCV 2016 Workshops: ACCV 2016 International
  Workshops, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers,
  Part II 13}, pages 251--263. Springer, 2017.
18. Umur~Aybars Ciftci, Ilke Demir, and Lijun Yin.
\newblock Fakecatcher: Detection of synthetic portrait videos using biological
  signals.
\newblock {\em IEEE Trans on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence}, 2020.
19. Davide Cozzolino, Justus Thies, Andreas R{\"o}ssler, Christian Riess, Matthias
  Nie{\ss}ner, and Luisa Verdoliva.
\newblock Forensictransfer: Weakly-supervised domain adaptation for forgery
  detection.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.02510}, 2018. [arXiv:1812.02510](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.02510)
20. Antonia Creswell, Tom White, Vincent Dumoulin, Kai Arulkumaran, Biswa Sengupta,
  and Anil~A Bharath.
\newblock Generative adversarial networks: An overview.
\newblock {\em IEEE signal processing magazine}, 35(1):53--65, 2018.
21. Hao Dang, Feng Liu, Joel Stehouwer, Xiaoming Liu, and Anil~K Jain.
\newblock On the detection of digital face manipulation.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern recognition}, pages 5781--5790, 2020.
22. Oscar De~Lima, Sean Franklin, Shreshtha Basu, Blake Karwoski, and Annet George.
\newblock Deepfake detection using spatiotemporal convolutional networks.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.14749}, 2020. [arXiv:2006.14749](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.14749)
23. Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Evangelos Ververas, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos
  Zafeiriou.
\newblock Retinaface: Single-shot multi-level face localisation in the wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 5203--5212, 2020.
24. Chao Feng, Ziyang Chen, and Andrew Owens.
\newblock Self-supervised video forensics by audio-visual anomaly detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 10491--10503, 2023.
25. Zhihao Gu, Yang Chen, Taiping Yao, Shouhong Ding, Jilin Li, and Lizhuang Ma.
\newblock Delving into the local: Dynamic inconsistency learning for deepfake
  video detection.
\newblock In {\em AAAI}, volume~36, pages 744--752, 2022.
26. Zhihao Gu, Taiping Yao, C~Yang, Ran Yi, Shouhong Ding, and Lizhuang Ma.
\newblock Region-aware temporal inconsistency learning for deepfake video
  detection.
\newblock In {\em IJCAI}, volume~1, 2022.
27. David G{\"u}era and Edward~J Delp.
\newblock Deepfake video detection using recurrent neural networks.
\newblock In {\em 2018 15th IEEE international conference on advanced video and
  signal based surveillance (AVSS)}, pages 1--6. IEEE, 2018.
28. Alexandros Haliassos, Pingchuan Ma, Rodrigo Mira, Stavros Petridis, and Maja
  Pantic.
\newblock Jointly learning visual and auditory speech representations from raw
  data.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2023.
29. Alexandros Haliassos, Rodrigo Mira, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Leveraging real talking faces via self-supervision for robust forgery
  detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 14950--14962, 2022.
30. Alexandros Haliassos, Konstantinos Vougioukas, Stavros Petridis, and Maja
  Pantic.
\newblock Lips don't lie: A generalisable and robust approach to face forgery
  detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 5039--5049, 2021.
31. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
\newblock Deep residual learning for image recognition.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 770--778, 2016.
32. Wei-Ning Hsu, Benjamin Bolte, Yao-Hung~Hubert Tsai, Kushal Lakhotia, Ruslan
  Salakhutdinov, and Abdelrahman Mohamed.
\newblock Hubert: Self-supervised speech representation learning by masked
  prediction of hidden units.
\newblock {\em IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
  Processing}, 29:3451--3460, 2021.
33. Ye~Jia, Yu~Zhang, Ron Weiss, Quan Wang, Jonathan Shen, Fei Ren, Patrick Nguyen,
  Ruoming Pang, Ignacio Lopez~Moreno, Yonghui Wu, et~al.
\newblock Transfer learning from speaker verification to multispeaker
  text-to-speech synthesis.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems}, 31, 2018.
34. Liming Jiang, Ren Li, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Deeperforensics-1.0: A large-scale dataset for real-world face
  forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 2889--2898, 2020.
35. Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila.
\newblock A style-based generator architecture for generative adversarial
  networks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 4401--4410, 2019.
36. Mikolaj Kegler, Pierre Beckmann, and Milos Cernak.
\newblock Deep speech inpainting of time-frequency masks.
\newblock 2020.
37. Jacob Devlin Ming-Wei~Chang Kenton and Lee~Kristina Toutanova.
\newblock Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language
  understanding.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of NAACL-HLT}, pages 4171--4186, 2019.
38. Hasam Khalid, Shahroz Tariq, Minha Kim, and Simon~S Woo.
\newblock Fakeavceleb: A novel audio-video multimodal deepfake dataset.
\newblock In {\em Thirty-fifth Conference on Neural Information Processing
  Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track (Round 2)}, 2021.
39. Diederik~P Kingma and Max Welling.
\newblock Auto-encoding variational bayes.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114}, 2013. [arXiv:1312.6114](https://arxiv.org/abs/1312.6114)
40. Iryna Korshunova, Wenzhe Shi, Joni Dambre, and Lucas Theis.
\newblock Fast face-swap using convolutional neural networks.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 3677--3685, 2017.
41. Patrick Kwon, Jaeseong You, Gyuhyeon Nam, Sungwoo Park, and Gyeongsu Chae.
\newblock Kodf: A large-scale korean deepfake detection dataset.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 10744--10753, 2021.
42. Jiaming Li, Hongtao Xie, Jiahong Li, Zhongyuan Wang, and Yongdong Zhang.
\newblock Frequency-aware discriminative feature learning supervised by
  single-center loss for face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 6458--6467, 2021.
43. Lingzhi Li, Jianmin Bao, Ting Zhang, Hao Yang, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, and Baining
  Guo.
\newblock Face x-ray for more general face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 5001--5010, 2020.
44. Yuezun Li, Ming-Ching Chang, and Siwei Lyu.
\newblock In ictu oculi: Exposing ai created fake videos by detecting eye
  blinking.
\newblock In {\em 2018 IEEE International workshop on information forensics and
  security (WIFS)}, pages 1--7. IEEE, 2018.
45. Yuezun Li, Xin Yang, Pu~Sun, Honggang Qi, and Siwei Lyu.
\newblock Celeb-df: A large-scale challenging dataset for deepfake forensics.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 3207--3216, 2020.
46. Pingchuan Ma, Alexandros Haliassos, Adriana Fernandez-Lopez, Honglie Chen,
  Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock Auto-avsr: Audio-visual speech recognition with automatic labels.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 1--5. IEEE, 2023.
47. Pingchuan Ma, Rodrigo Mira, Stavros Petridis, Bj{\"o}rn~W Schuller, and Maja
  Pantic.
\newblock Lira: Learning visual speech representations from audio through
  self-supervision.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.09171}, 2021. [arXiv:2106.09171](https://arxiv.org/abs/2106.09171)
48. Pingchuan Ma, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
\newblock End-to-end audio-visual speech recognition with conformers.
\newblock In {\em ICASSP 2021-2021 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
  Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, pages 7613--7617. IEEE, 2021.
49. Meinard M{\"u}ller.
\newblock Dynamic time warping.
\newblock {\em Information retrieval for music and motion}, pages 69--84, 2007.
50. Yuval Nirkin, Yosi Keller, and Tal Hassner.
\newblock Fsgan: Subject agnostic face swapping and reenactment.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 7184--7193, 2019.
51. Trevine Oorloff, Surya Koppisetti, Nicol{\`o} Bonettini, Divyaraj Solanki, Ben
  Colman, Yaser Yacoob, Ali Shahriyari, and Gaurav Bharaj.
\newblock Avff: Audio-visual feature fusion for video deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 27102--27112, 2024.
52. Ivan Perov, Daiheng Gao, Nikolay Chervoniy, Kunlin Liu, Sugasa Marangonda,
  Chris Um{\'e}, Mr~Dpfks, Carl~Shift Facenheim, Luis RP, Jian Jiang, et~al.
\newblock Deepfacelab: Integrated, flexible and extensible face-swapping
  framework.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.05535}, 2020. [arXiv:2005.05535](https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.05535)
53. KR~Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay~P Namboodiri, and CV~Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the
  wild.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the 28th ACM international conference on
  multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
54. Alec Radford, Jong~Wook Kim, Tao Xu, Greg Brockman, Christine McLeavey, and
  Ilya Sutskever.
\newblock Robust speech recognition via large-scale weak supervision.
\newblock In {\em International Conference on Machine Learning}, pages
  28492--28518. PMLR, 2023.
55. Andreas Rossler, Davide Cozzolino, Luisa Verdoliva, Christian Riess, Justus
  Thies, and Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Faceforensics++: Learning to detect manipulated facial images.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 1--11, 2019.
56. Bowen Shi, Wei-Ning Hsu, Kushal Lakhotia, and Abdelrahman Mohamed.
\newblock Learning audio-visual speech representation by masked multimodal
  cluster prediction.
\newblock {\em International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2022.
57. Kaede Shiohara and Toshihiko Yamasaki.
\newblock Detecting deepfakes with self-blended images.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 18720--18729, 2022.
58. Aliaksandr Siarohin, St{\'e}phane Lathuili{\`e}re, Sergey Tulyakov, Elisa
  Ricci, and Nicu Sebe.
\newblock First order motion model for image animation.
\newblock {\em NIPS}, 32, 2019.
59. Justus Thies, Michael Zollh{\"o}fer, and Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Deferred neural rendering: Image synthesis using neural textures.
\newblock {\em Acm Transactions on Graphics (TOG)}, 38(4):1--12, 2019.
60. Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger, Christian Theobalt, and
  Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Face2face: Real-time face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 2387--2395, 2016.
61. Suramya Tomar.
\newblock Converting video formats with ffmpeg.
\newblock {\em Linux journal}, 2006(146):10, 2006.
62. Chengrui Wang and Weihong Deng.
\newblock Representative forgery mining for fake face detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
  pattern recognition}, pages 14923--14932, 2021.
63. Xueyu Wang, Jiajun Huang, Siqi Ma, Surya Nepal, and Chang Xu.
\newblock Deepfake disrupter: The detector of deepfake is my friend.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 14920--14929, 2022.
64. Zhendong Wang, Jianmin Bao, Wengang Zhou, Weilun Wang, and Houqiang Li.
\newblock Altfreezing for more general video face forgery detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
  Pattern Recognition}, pages 4129--4138, 2023.
65. Wenyuan Yang, Xiaoyu Zhou, Zhikai Chen, Bofei Guo, Zhongjie Ba, Zhihua Xia,
  Xiaochun Cao, and Kui Ren.
\newblock Avoid-df: Audio-visual joint learning for detecting deepfake.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security},
  18:2015--2029, 2023.
66. Ran Yi, Zipeng Ye, Juyong Zhang, Hujun Bao, and Yong-Jin Liu.
\newblock Audio-driven talking face video generation with learning-based
  personalized head pose.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.10137}, 2020. [arXiv:2002.10137](../2020/2002.10137.md)
67. Zhaoyang Zeng, Daniel McDuff, Yale Song, et~al.
\newblock Contrastive learning of global and local video representations.
\newblock {\em Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems},
  34:7025--7040, 2021.
68. Daichi Zhang, Chenyu Li, Fanzhao Lin, Dan Zeng, and Shiming Ge.
\newblock Detecting deepfake videos with temporal dropout 3dcnn.
\newblock IJCAI, 2021.
69. Hanqing Zhao, Wenbo Zhou, Dongdong Chen, Weiming Zhang, and Nenghai Yu.
\newblock Self-supervised transformer for deepfake detection.
\newblock {\em arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.01265}, 2022. [arXiv:2203.01265](https://arxiv.org/abs/2203.01265)
70. Tianchen Zhao, Xiang Xu, Mingze Xu, Hui Ding, Yuanjun Xiong, and Wei Xia.
\newblock Learning self-consistency for deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 15023--15033, 2021.
71. Yinglin Zheng, Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Ming Zeng, and Fang Wen.
\newblock Exploring temporal coherence for more general video face forgery
  detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 15044--15054, 2021.
72. Yipin Zhou and Ser-Nam Lim.
\newblock Joint audio-visual deepfake detection.
\newblock In {\em Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
  Computer Vision}, pages 14800--14809, 2021.
73. Qiushi Zhu, Long Zhou, Ziqiang Zhang, Shujie Liu, Binxing Jiao, Jie Zhang,
  Lirong Dai, Daxin Jiang, Jinyu Li, and Furu Wei.
\newblock Vatlm: Visual-audio-text pre-training with unified masked prediction
  for speech representation learning.
\newblock {\em IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, 2023.
