---
arxiv_id: "2508.14033"
title: "InfiniteTalk: Audio-driven Video Generation for Sparse-Frame Video Dubbing"
authors:
  - Shaoshu Yang
  - Zhe Kong
  - Feng Gao
  - Meng Cheng
  - Xiangyu Liu
  - Yong Zhang
  - Zhuoliang Kang
  - Wenhan Luo
  - Xunliang Cai
  - Ran He
  - Xiaoming Wei
submitted: "2025-08-19"
categories: []
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.14033
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 29/54
citations_resolved_at: "2026-07-21T00:13:47+00:00"
references_parsed: 54
arxiv_version: ""
---

# Method

## Formulation

#### Conditional Flow matching for audio-driven video generation

Flow matching video generative models adopts a neural network to generate realistic video frames by modeling a timestep-dependent vector field that transports samples from a noise distribution to a target video distribution. Given a ground truth conditional video distribution $`q(\boldsymbol{x} \vert \boldsymbol{c})`$ where $`\boldsymbol{x} \in \mathbb{R}^{t \times h \times w \times c}`$ is the encoded video latent. $`\boldsymbol{c} = \{y, a, \boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{ref}}\}, y \in \mathbb{R}^{m \times d_{\mathrm{text}}}, a \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times d_{\mathrm{audio}}}, \boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{ref}} \in \mathbb{R}^{t_{\mathrm{ref}} \times h\times w \times c}`$ are the conditions, including the text prompt embedding, and the audio embedding, and the reference frames latent. Conditional flow matching defines a series of distributions by interpolating $`q(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a)`$ with a known trivial distribution (e.g. Gaussian noise) $`p(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a)`$ using a continuous variable $`t \in [0. 1]`$.

```math
\begin{equation}
q_t(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a) = (1 - t) \cdot p(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a) + t \cdot q(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a).
\end{equation}
```

To be specific, a random variable $`\boldsymbol{x}_t \sim q_t(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a)`$ can be obtained by interpolating between $`\boldsymbol{x}_0 \sim p(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a)`$ and $`\boldsymbol{x}_1 \sim q(\boldsymbol{x} \vert y, a)`$ via $`\boldsymbol{x}_t = (1 - t) \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_1 + t \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_0`$. The generative model $`\boldsymbol{v}_\theta(\cdot)`$, parameterized by $`\theta`$, is trained to match a continuous velocity field $`\boldsymbol{v}_\theta(\boldsymbol{x}_t \vert y, a) \simeq \frac{d \boldsymbol{x}_t}{d t}`$. To achieve so, we adopt the conditional flow matching objective.

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{fm}} = \mathbb{E}_{t, \boldsymbol{x}_0, \boldsymbol{x}_1} \|\boldsymbol{v}_\theta(\boldsymbol{x}_t \vert y) - (\boldsymbol{x}_1 - \boldsymbol{x}_0)\|_2^2.
\end{equation}
```

An ODE solver can be used to sample from a flow matching generative models.

#### Sparse-frame video dubbing

Video dubbing localizes content by replacing original audio with translated speech while preserving visual authenticity. As formalized in this work, the task transforms a source video latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_0 \in \mathbb{R}^{t \times h \times w \times c}`$ and a target audio $`a \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times d_{\mathrm{audio }}}`$ into an output video where lip movements, facial expressions, and body dynamics synchronize organically with the new audio. Traditional video dubbing techniques focus exclusively on oral region inpainting—editing lip movements while freezing head rotations, facial expressions, and body gestures . This creates immersion-breaking mismatches, as static body language contradicts emotional speech (e.g., a rigid posture during passionate dialogue). Sparse-frame video dubbing, illustrated in <a href="#fig:teaser" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:teaser">[fig:teaser]</a>, fundamentally redefines this process: it preserves only select keyframes $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{ref}}`$ to anchor identity, emotional cadence, symbolic gestures, and camera trajectories—critical for visual continuity—while liberating full-body dynamics (facial expressions, head motions, body gestures) to organically synchronize with dubbed audio. As <a href="#fig:teaser" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:teaser">[fig:teaser]</a> demonstrates, this paradigm shift enables lifelike alignment where head turns follow speech rhythm and gestures amplify emotional tone—impossible with lip-only editing. Crucially, sparse-frame dubbing operates on infinite-length sequences, demanding generative continuation beyond short clips to maintain synchronization across extended durations, a capability unattainable with traditional frame-by-frame inpainting.

## Observation on naive solutions

This section investigates practical approaches for sparse-frame video dubbing using two baseline models: image-to-video (I2V) and first-last-frame-to-video (FL2V) . As illustrated in <a href="#fig:observation1" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:observation1">[fig:observation1]</a>, both methods exhibit critical limitations when generating long video sequences. The I2V approach operates by initializing the first chunk of the video from a single reference frame (e.g., the source video’s starting keyframe). For subsequent chunks, it uses only the last generated frame of the preceding chunk as the new reference. While this preserves motion flexibility, the lack of persistent anchoring to the original keyframes leads to accumulated errors: subtle discrepancies in identity (e.g., facial features gradually deviating from the source actor) and color tones (e.g., background hues shifting across chunks) compound over time, resulting in visible degradation. In contrast, the FL2V method conditions each chunk on both the start and end frames of the input segment, ensuring alignment with the source video’s reference poses. This eliminates accumulation errors but introduces a new problem: the model enforces rigid control by strictly replicating the reference frames at the corresponding timestamp. This contradicts the soft conditioning required for sparse-frame dubbing, where full body motions must dynamically adapt to audio cues.

Crucially, both methods suffer from abrupt inter-chunk transitions. Since they rely solely on static image conditions (e.g., a single frame for I2V or two fixed frames for FL2V), they lack momentum information that should carry over between chunks. These observations a highlight fundamental trade-off: I2V prioritizes motion fluidity at the expense of accumulated error, while FL2V prioritizes reference fidelity at the cost of motion naturalness.

## Audio-driven streaming video generator with reference frames

To resolve the accumulated accumulated error in I2V models and the abrupt transitions in FL2V models, we build a audio-driven streaming human animation architecture. This framework employs context frames, defined as the trailing segment of each previously generated chunk, to propagate kinetic momentum into subsequent segments. By processing these frames through a diffusion transformer, the model sustains motion continuity. To eliminate accumulated errors, we adopt multiple reference frames dynamically sampled from the source video, similar to FL2V’s multi-frame conditioning. These keyframes preserve critical visual attributes including identity, background details, camera trajectories, and stylistic elements. Crucially, unlike FL2V’s rigid replication of reference frames at fixed positions, which suppresses natural motion. Our model has the potential to achieve soft conditioning as discussed in <a href="#sec:strategies" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="sec:strategies">1.4</a>.

The sketch for the model is shown in <a href="#fig:pipeline" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:pipeline">[fig:pipeline]</a>. The model consists an audio embedder , a video VAE, and diffusion transformer (DiT) . We first introduce how our model is trained. In the followings, let the video latent refers to embedding derived by encoding pixel space video by using the video VAE. Similarly, let audio embedding denote the embedding computed by encoding a audio sequence using the audio embedder. To train the model, we do not need a dubbed video pair, but only a video with the audio track is needed. Given a source video. The reference frame is uniformly random sampled from the video. During training, the context frames are the first $`4(t_c - 1) + 1`$ frames of the source video. After VAE encoding, we derive reference frame latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{ref}} \in \mathbb{R}^{c \times 1 \times h \times w}`$, the full source video latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{full}} \in \mathbb{R}^{c \times (t + t_c) \times h \times w}`$, the context frames latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{context}} \in \mathbb{R}^{c \times t_c \times h \times w}`$, and the subsequent frames latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_0 \in \mathbb{R}^{c \times t \times h \times s}`$ separately, where the full video latent is a combination of the context frames latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{context}}`$ and the subsequent frames latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_0`$, $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{full}} = \{\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{context}}, \boldsymbol{x}_0\}`$. The audio sequence in the source video is encoded to get embedding $`a`$. Without a loss of generality, we show the process to train at $`t`$ in conditional flow matching in this section. Unit gaussian noise is used as the trivial distribution. The noisy latent is derived by $`\boldsymbol{x}_t = (1 - t) \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_1 + t \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_0, \boldsymbol{x}_1 \sim \mathcal{N}(\boldsymbol{0}, \mathbb{I})`$ where $`\boldsymbol{x}_1`$ is gaussian noise that has the same dimensionality of $`\boldsymbol{x}_0`$. The DiT model formulates a field estimator $`\boldsymbol{v}_\theta(\boldsymbol{x}_t \vert \boldsymbol{c})`$ using condition $`\boldsymbol{c} = \{y, a, \boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{ref}}, \boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{tran}}\}`$. Specifically, we first concatenate the noisy latent $`\boldsymbol{x}_t`$ and the clean context frames $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{context}}`$ in the temporal dimension to get $`\boldsymbol{z}_1 \in \mathbb{R}^{c \times (t + t_c) \times h \times w}`$. Then we pad the reference frame to the temporal length $`t_c + t`$ to get $`\boldsymbol{z}_2 \in \mathbb{R}^{c \times (t + t_c) \times h \times w}`$. Finally, we concatenate $`\boldsymbol{z}_1`$, $`\boldsymbol{z}_2`$ and a reference frame indicating mask $`\boldsymbol{m} \in \mathbb{R}^{4 \times (t + t_c) \times h \times w}`$ in channel dimension. Mathematically, the process is

```math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
    \boldsymbol{z}_1 & = \mathrm{concat}((\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{context}}, \boldsymbol{x}_t), 2) \\
    \boldsymbol{z}_2 & = \mathrm{concat}((\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{ref}}, \mathbb{0}), 2) \\
    \boldsymbol{m}   & = \mathrm{concat}((\mathbb{1}, \mathbb{0}), 2) \\
    \boldsymbol{z}   & = \mathrm{concat}((\boldsymbol{z}_1, \boldsymbol{z}_2, \boldsymbol{m}), 1)
\end{aligned}
\end{equation}
```

where $`\mathrm{concat}(\cdot)`$ is the concatenation operator (e.g, $`\mathrm{concat}((\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{context}}, \boldsymbol{x}_t), 2)`$ concatenates $`\boldsymbol{x}_{\mathrm{context}}`$ and $`\boldsymbol{x}_t`$ in the 2-nd dimension). $`\mathbb{0}`$ and $`\mathbb{1}`$ are zero and one tensors that have the dimensions $`\mathbb{0} \in \mathbb{R}^{4 \times (t + t_c - 1) \times h \times w}, \mathbb{1} \in \mathbb{R}^{4 \times 1 \times h \times w}`$. As depicted by <a href="#fig:pipeline" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:pipeline">[fig:pipeline]</a> **(right)**. Within our transformer model, there is an audio cross-attention module and an image cross-attention that achieves audio and reference image conditioning. The reference frame is processed by CLIP vision model to get the embedding $`\boldsymbol{z}_{\mathrm{ref}}`$ before feeding to the DiT. To train this model, we adopt the conditional flow matching objective .

```math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{\mathrm{fm}} = \mathbb{E}_{t, \boldsymbol{x}_0, \boldsymbol{x}_1, \boldsymbol{c}} \|\boldsymbol{v}_\theta(\boldsymbol{x}_t \vert \boldsymbol{c}) - (\boldsymbol{x}_1 - \boldsymbol{x}_0)\|_2^2.
\end{equation}
```

Then, we briefly introduce the sampling method. An illustration is presented in <a href="#fig:mps" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:mps">[fig:mps]</a>. We generate the whole long video sequence by auto-regressively generating small video chunks. In the first video chunk, we use the first frame of the input video as the reference frame and no context frames are required. In the following video chunks, we use the last $`4 (t_c - 1) + 1`$ frames from the previous output video chunk as the context frames and use the first image of the input chunk as the reference frame.

## Soft conditioning

#### Control strength from the Reference frame

This section explores strategies for achieving soft conditioning in sparse-frame video dubbing where the model must generate audio-aligned full-body motions without rigidly replicating reference frames that may conflict with dubbed speech. Meanwhile, we expect the model to have adaptive control strength: (1) when the reference is similar to the context frames, the control strength is weak such that the model produces diverse dynamics. (2) when the reference is very distinct to the context frames, the control strength is stronger to ensure better consistency in identity and background. Below, we show the analysis on the training strategies that match the requirements.

We initiate our investigation with Model M0, which samples reference frames uniformly at random from the current source input video chunk during training. As demonstrated in <a href="#fig:observation2" data-reference-type="ref+label" data-reference="fig:observation2">[fig:observation2]</a>, this approach exhibits excessive control strength. The model inappropriately duplicates reference content at arbitrary timestamps, such as replicating slapping on the forehead during emotionally neutral speech, disrupting audio-visual synchronization.

To systematically analyze how reference positioning during training governs control fidelity, we examine two granular dimensions: chunk-level positioning (selecting which temporal segment provides the reference) and frame-level positioning (choosing the specific frame within that segment). We train three model variants to isolate these effects. Model M1 samples references exclusively from the first or last frame of the input chunk. This strategy mirrors FL2V’s rigidity, forcing the generated video to replicate reference poses precisely at chunk boundaries, even when they contradict the audio’s emotional cadence. Model M2 samples references from temporally distant chunks (e.g., segments separated by \>5 seconds). While this weakens control sufficiently to avoid replication, it introduces accumulated color and background errors over long sequences, indicating insufficient fidelity preservation. In contrast, Model M3 samples references from adjacent chunks (e.g., within 1 seconds of the input). This configuration achieves moderate control strength: references preserve identity and camera motion without exact duplication, while eliminating accumulated errors entirely.

Our experiments conclusively demonstrate that chunk-level distance is the dominant factor modulating control strength. Shorter temporal distances (as in M3) create an optimal equilibrium: they anchor visual consistency to the source while liberating facial expressions, head rotations, and body gestures to organically synchronize with audio. Longer distances (as in M2) degrade preservation capabilities, leading to destabilized outputs. Fixed boundary sampling (as in M1) prioritizes replication over expressiveness, stifling motion dynamics. Thus, M3’s near-chunk positioning emerges as the foundational strategy for soft conditioning—enabling faithful yet flexible video dubbing where motions breathe in harmony with speech.

#### Camera control

We explore ways to address the camera movement preservation in sparse-frame video dubbing in this section. The utilization of reference frames is providing a global control of camera trajectory. However, the detailed camera movement within each video chunk is not controlled and may contradict the source video. To resolve this, we use two plugin including SDEdit and Uni3C . SDEdit incorporates trajectory information by adding the source video to the initialize noise at a scale $`t_0`$. The denoising sampling process starts from $`t= t_0`$ instead of $`t=1`$. $`\boldsymbol{x}_{t_0} = (1 - t_0) \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_1 + t_0 \cdot \boldsymbol{x}_0`$ Uni3C injects camera movements by deploying a ControlNet-like architecture. A comparison between the methods is shown in our experiments.

## References

1. Alexei Baevski, Henry Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and Michael Auli.
   \newblock wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised learning of speech representations, 2020.
   \newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.11477}.
2. Antoni Bigata, Rodrigo Mira, Stella Bounareli, Michał Stypułkowski, Konstantinos Vougioukas, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pantic.
   \newblock Keysync: A robust approach for leakage-free lip synchronization in high resolution, 2025.
   \newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00497}.
3. Andreas Blattmann, Tim Dockhorn, Sumith Kulal, Daniel Mendelevitch, Maciej Kilian, Dominik Lorenz, Yam Levi, Zion English, Vikram Voleti, Adam Letts, Varun Jampani, and Robin Rombach.
   \newblock Stable video diffusion: Scaling latent video diffusion models to large datasets, 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
4. Andreas Blattmann, Robin Rombach, Huan Ling, Tim Dockhorn, Seung~Wook Kim, Sanja Fidler, and Karsten Kreis.
   \newblock Align your latents: High-resolution video synthesis with latent diffusion models.
   \newblock In \emph{IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ({CVPR})}, 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
5. Chenjie Cao, Jingkai Zhou, shikai Li, Jingyun Liang, Chaohui Yu, Fan Wang, Xiangyang Xue, and Yanwei Fu.
   \newblock Uni3c: Unifying precisely 3d-enhanced camera and human motion controls for video generation.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.14899}, 2025. [arXiv:2504.14899](https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.14899)
6. Haoxin Chen, Menghan Xia, Yingqing He, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Shaoshu Yang, Jinbo Xing, Yaofang Liu, Qifeng Chen, Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, and Ying Shan.
   \newblock Videocrafter1: Open diffusion models for high-quality video generation, 2023.
7. Haoxin Chen, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Menghan Xia, Xintao Wang, Chao Weng, and Ying Shan.
   \newblock Videocrafter2: Overcoming data limitations for high-quality video diffusion models, 2024.
8. Yi~Chen, Sen Liang, Zixiang Zhou, Ziyao Huang, Yifeng Ma, Junshu Tang, Qin Lin, Yuan Zhou, and Qinglin Lu.
   \newblock Hunyuanvideo-avatar: High-fidelity audio-driven human animation for multiple characters.
   \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20156}, 2025{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2505.20156](./2505.20156.md)
9. Zhiyuan Chen, Jiajiong Cao, Zhiquan Chen, Yuming Li, and Chenguang Ma.
   \newblock Echomimic: Lifelike audio-driven portrait animations through editable landmark conditions.
   \newblock In \emph{AAAI}, volume~39, pp.\ 2403--2410, 2025{\natexlab{b}}.
10. Mehdi Cherti, Romain Beaumont, Ross Wightman, Mitchell Wortsman, Gabriel Ilharco, Cade Gordon, Christoph Schuhmann, Ludwig Schmidt, and Jenia Jitsev.
    \newblock Reproducible scaling laws for contrastive language-image learning.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\ 2818--2829, 2023.
11. Jiahao Cui, Hui Li, Yun Zhan, Hanlin Shang, Kaihui Cheng, Yuqi Ma, Shan Mu, Hang Zhou, Jingdong Wang, and Siyu Zhu.
    \newblock Hallo3: Highly dynamic and realistic portrait image animation with video diffusion transformer.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.00733}, 2024. [arXiv:2412.00733](../2024/2412.00733.md)
12. Patrick Esser, Robin Rombach, and Bjorn Ommer.
    \newblock Taming transformers for high-resolution image synthesis.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition}, pp.\ 12873--12883, 2021.
13. Zhengcong Fei, Hao Jiang, Di~Qiu, Baoxuan Gu, Youqiang Zhang, Jiahua Wang, Jialin Bai, Debang Li, Mingyuan Fan, Guibin Chen, and Yahui Zhou.
    \newblock Skyreels-audio: Omni audio-conditioned talking portraits in video diffusion transformers, 2025.
    \newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.00830}.
14. Qijun Gan, Ruizi Yang, Jianke Zhu, Shaofei Xue, and Steven Hoi.
    \newblock Omniavatar: Efficient audio-driven avatar video generation with adaptive body animation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.18866}, 2025. [arXiv:2506.18866](./2506.18866.md)
15. Songwei Ge, Seungjun Nah, Guilin Liu, Tyler Poon, Andrew Tao, Bryan Catanzaro, David Jacobs, Jia-Bin Huang, Ming-Yu Liu, and Yogesh Balaji.
    \newblock Preserve your own correlation: A noise prior for video diffusion models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.10474}, 2023. [arXiv:2305.10474](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10474)
16. Yingqing He, Tianyu Yang, Yong Zhang, Ying Shan, and Qifeng Chen.
    \newblock Latent video diffusion models for high-fidelity video generation with arbitrary lengths.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.13221}, 2022. [arXiv:2211.13221](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.13221)
17. Jonathan Ho, William Chan, Chitwan Saharia, Jay Whang, Ruiqi Gao, Alexey Gritsenko, Diederik~P Kingma, Ben Poole, Mohammad Norouzi, David~J Fleet, et~al.
    \newblock Imagen video: High definition video generation with diffusion models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.02303}, 2022{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2210.02303](https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.02303)
18. Jonathan Ho, Tim Salimans, Alexey Gritsenko, William Chan, Mohammad Norouzi, and David~J Fleet.
    \newblock Video diffusion models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03458}, 2022{\natexlab{b}}. [arXiv:2204.03458](https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.03458)
19. Yubo Huang, Weiqiang Wang, Sirui Zhao, Tong Xu, Lin Liu, and Enhong Chen.
    \newblock Bind-your-avatar: Multi-talking-character video generation with dynamic 3d-mask-based embedding router.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.19833}, 2025. [arXiv:2506.19833](./2506.19833.md)
20. Xiaozhong Ji, Xiaobin Hu, Zhihong Xu, Junwei Zhu, Chuming Lin, Qingdong He, Jiangning Zhang, Donghao Luo, Yi~Chen, Qin Lin, et~al.
    \newblock Sonic: Shifting focus to global audio perception in portrait animation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16331}, 2024. [arXiv:2411.16331](../2024/2411.16331.md)
21. Jianwen Jiang, Chao Liang, Jiaqi Yang, Gaojie Lin, Tianyun Zhong, and Yanbo Zheng.
    \newblock Loopy: Taming audio-driven portrait avatar with long-term motion dependency.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02634}, 2024. [arXiv:2409.02634](../2024/2409.02634.md)
22. Zhe Kong, Feng Gao, Yong Zhang, Zhuoliang Kang, Xiaoming Wei, Xunliang Cai, Guanying Chen, and Wenhan Luo.
    \newblock Let them talk: Audio-driven multi-person conversational video generation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22647}, 2025{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2505.22647](./2505.22647.md)
23. Zhe Kong, Le~Li, Yong Zhang, Feng Gao, Shaoshu Yang, Tao Wang, Kaihao Zhang, Zhuoliang Kang, Xiaoming Wei, Guanying Chen, et~al.
    \newblock Dam-vsr: Disentanglement of appearance and motion for video super-resolution.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01012}, 2025{\natexlab{b}}. [arXiv:2507.01012](https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.01012)
24. Chunyu Li, Chao Zhang, Weikai Xu, Jinghui Xie, Weiguo Feng, Bingyue Peng, and Weiwei Xing.
    \newblock Latentsync: Audio conditioned latent diffusion models for lip sync.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09262}, 2024. [arXiv:2412.09262](../2024/2412.09262.md)
25. Gaojie Lin, Jianwen Jiang, Chao Liang, Tianyun Zhong, Jiaqi Yang, Zerong Zheng, and Yanbo Zheng.
    \newblock Cyberhost: A one-stage diffusion framework for audio-driven talking body generation.
    \newblock In \emph{ICLR}.
26. Gaojie Lin, Jianwen Jiang, Jiaqi Yang, Zerong Zheng, and Chao Liang.
    \newblock Omnihuman-1: Rethinking the scaling-up of one-stage conditioned human animation models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.01061}, 2025. [arXiv:2502.01061](./2502.01061.md)
27. Xingchao Liu, Chengyue Gong, and Qiang Liu.
    \newblock Flow straight and fast: Learning to generate and transfer data with rectified flow, 2023.
    \newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.03003}.
28. Chenlin Meng, Yutong He, Yang Song, Jiaming Song, Jiajun Wu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Stefano Ermon.
    \newblock {SDE}dit: Guided image synthesis and editing with stochastic differential equations.
    \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2022.
29. Rang Meng, Xingyu Zhang, Yuming Li, and Chenguang Ma.
    \newblock Echomimicv2: Towards striking, simplified, and semi-body human animation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10061}, 2024. [arXiv:2411.10061](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.10061)
30. Alexander~Quinn Nichol and Prafulla Dhariwal.
    \newblock Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models.
    \newblock In \emph{International Conference on Machine Learning}, pp.\ 8162--8171. PMLR, 2021.
31. William Peebles and Saining Xie.
    \newblock Scalable diffusion models with transformers.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09748}, 2022. [arXiv:2212.09748](https://arxiv.org/abs/2212.09748)
32. Yuming Li Chenguang~Ma Rang~Meng, Xingyu~Zhang.
    \newblock Echomimicv2: Towards striking, simplified, and semi-body human animation, 2025.
33. Steffen Schneider, Alexei Baevski, Ronan Collobert, and Michael Auli.
    \newblock wav2vec: Unsupervised pre-training for speech recognition, 2019.
    \newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.05862}.
34. Uriel Singer, Adam Polyak, Thomas Hayes, Xi~Yin, Jie An, Songyang Zhang, Qiyuan Hu, Harry Yang, Oron Ashual, Oran Gafni, et~al.
    \newblock Make-a-video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792}, 2022. [arXiv:2209.14792](https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.14792)
35. Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon.
    \newblock Denoising diffusion implicit models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.02502}, 2020. [arXiv:2010.02502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502)
36. Genmo Team.
    \newblock Mochi 1.
    \newblock \url{https://github.com/genmoai/models}, 2024.
37. Keyu Tian, Yi~Jiang, Zehuan Yuan, Bingyue Peng, and Liwei Wang.
    \newblock Visual autoregressive modeling: Scalable image generation via next-scale prediction.
    \newblock 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
38. Linrui Tian, Qi~Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo.
    \newblock Emo: Emote portrait alive generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions.
    \newblock In \emph{ECCV}, pp.\ 244--260. Springer, 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
39. Linrui Tian, Siqi Hu, Qi~Wang, Bang Zhang, and Liefeng Bo.
    \newblock Emo2: End-effector guided audio-driven avatar video generation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10687}, 2025. [arXiv:2501.10687](./2501.10687.md)
40. Shuyuan Tu, Yueming Pan, Yinming Huang, Xintong Han, Zhen Xing, Qi~Dai, Chong Luo, Zuxuan Wu, and Jiang Yu-Gang.
    \newblock Stableavatar: Infinite-length audio-driven avatar video generation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08248}, 2025. [arXiv:2508.08248](./2508.08248.md)
41. Team Wan, Ang Wang, Baole Ai, Bin Wen, Chaojie Mao, Chen-Wei Xie, Di~Chen, Feiwu Yu, Haiming Zhao, Jianxiao Yang, Jianyuan Zeng, Jiayu Wang, Jingfeng Zhang, Jingren Zhou, Jinkai Wang, Jixuan Chen, Kai Zhu, Kang Zhao, Keyu Yan, Lianghua Huang, Mengyang Feng, Ningyi Zhang, Pandeng Li, Pingyu Wu, Ruihang Chu, Ruili Feng, Shiwei Zhang, Siyang Sun, Tao Fang, Tianxing Wang, Tianyi Gui, Tingyu Weng, Tong Shen, Wei Lin, Wei Wang, Wei Wang, Wenmeng Zhou, Wente Wang, Wenting Shen, Wenyuan Yu, Xianzhong Shi, Xiaoming Huang, Xin Xu, Yan Kou, Yangyu Lv, Yifei Li, Yijing Liu, Yiming Wang, Yingya Zhang, Yitong Huang, Yong Li, You Wu, Yu~Liu, Yulin Pan, Yun Zheng, Yuntao Hong, Yupeng Shi, Yutong Feng, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhen Han, Zhi-Fan Wu, and Ziyu Liu.
    \newblock Wan: Open and advanced large-scale video generative models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.20314}, 2025. [arXiv:2503.20314](https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.20314)
42. Mengchao Wang, Qiang Wang, Fan Jiang, Yaqi Fan, Yunpeng Zhang, Yonggang Qi, Kun Zhao, and Mu~Xu.
    \newblock Fantasytalking: Realistic talking portrait generation via coherent motion synthesis.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.04842}, 2025. [arXiv:2504.04842](./2504.04842.md)
43. Yaohui Wang, Xinyuan Chen, Xin Ma, Shangchen Zhou, Ziqi Huang, Yi~Wang, Ceyuan Yang, Yinan He, Jiashuo Yu, Peiqing Yang, Yuwei Guo, Tianxing Wu, Chenyang Si, Yuming Jiang, Cunjian Chen, Chen~Change Loy, Bo~Dai, Dahua Lin, Yu~Qiao, and Ziwei Liu.
    \newblock Lavie: High-quality video generation with cascaded latent diffusion models, 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
44. Yinhuai Wang, Jiwen Yu, and Jian Zhang.
    \newblock Zero-shot image restoration using denoising diffusion null-space model.
    \newblock \emph{The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
45. Huawei Wei, Zejun Yang, and Zhisheng Wang.
    \newblock Aniportrait: Audio-driven synthesis of photorealistic portrait animation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17694}, 2024. [arXiv:2403.17694](../2024/2403.17694.md)
46. Zijian Zhang Rox Min Zuozhuo Dai Jin Zhou Jiangfeng Xiong Xin Li Bo Wu Jianwei Zhang Kathrina Wu Qin Lin Aladdin Wang Andong Wang Changlin Li Duojun Huang Fang Yang Hao Tan Hongmei Wang Jacob Song Jiawang Bai Jianbing Wu Jinbao Xue Joey Wang Junkun Yuan Kai Wang Mengyang Liu Pengyu Li Shuai Li Weiyan Wang Wenqing Yu Xinchi Deng Yang Li Yanxin Long Yi Chen Yutao Cui Yuanbo Peng Zhentao Yu Zhiyu He Zhiyong Xu Zixiang Zhou Zunnan Xu Yangyu Tao Qinglin Lu Songtao Liu Daquan Zhou Hongfa Wang Yong Yang Di Wang Yuhong~Liu Weijie~Kong, Qi~Tian and along with Caesar~Zhong Jie~Jiang.
    \newblock Hunyuanvideo: A systematic framework for large video generative models, 2024.
    \newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.03603}.
47. Jinbo Xing, Menghan Xia, Yuxin Liu, Yuechen Zhang, Yong Zhang, Yingqing He, Hanyuan Liu, Haoxin Chen, Xiaodong Cun, Xintao Wang, et~al.
    \newblock Make-your-video: Customized video generation using textual and structural guidance.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.00943}, 2023. [arXiv:2306.00943](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.00943)
48. Mingwang Xu, Hui Li, Qingkun Su, Hanlin Shang, Liwei Zhang, Ce~Liu, Jingdong Wang, Yao Yao, and Siyu Zhu.
    \newblock Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait image animation.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08801}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.08801](../2024/2406.08801.md)
49. Wilson Yan, Yunzhi Zhang, Pieter Abbeel, and Aravind Srinivas.
    \newblock Videogpt: Video generation using vq-vae and transformers.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.10157}, 2021. [arXiv:2104.10157](https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.10157)
50. Zhuoyi Yang, Jiayan Teng, Wendi Zheng, Ming Ding, Shiyu Huang, Jiazheng Xu, Yuanming Yang, Wenyi Hong, Xiaohan Zhang, Guanyu Feng, et~al.
    \newblock Cogvideox: Text-to-video diffusion models with an expert transformer.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.06072}, 2024. [arXiv:2408.06072](https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.06072)
51. Yue Zhang, Zhizhou Zhong, Minhao Liu, Zhaokang Chen, Bin Wu, Yubin Zeng, Chao Zhan, Yingjie He, Junxin Huang, and Wenjiang Zhou.
    \newblock Musetalk: Real-time high-fidelity video dubbing via spatio-temporal sampling, 2025.
    \newblock URL \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10122}.
52. Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu~Ding, and Changjie Fan.
    \newblock Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
    \newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pp.\ 3661--3670, 2021.
53. Daquan Zhou, Weimin Wang, Hanshu Yan, Weiwei Lv, Yizhe Zhu, and Jiashi Feng.
    \newblock Magicvideo: Efficient video generation with latent diffusion models.
    \newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11018}, 2022. [arXiv:2211.11018](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.11018)
54. Hao Zhu, Wayne Wu, Wentao Zhu, Liming Jiang, Siwei Tang, Li~Zhang, Ziwei Liu, and Chen~Change Loy.
    \newblock {CelebV-HQ}: A large-scale video facial attributes dataset.
    \newblock In \emph{ECCV}, 2022.
