---
arxiv_id: '2508.12163'
title: 'RealTalk: Realistic Emotion-Aware Lifelike Talking-Head Synthesis'
authors:
- Wenqing Wang
- Yun Fu
submitted: '2025-08-16'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.AI
- cs.HC
- cs.LG
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.12163
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 5/56
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:13:40+00:00'
references_parsed: 56
arxiv_version: ''
---

# Introduction

Generating audio-driven talking heads is a valuable and important technology for a wide range of artificial social intelligence applications, including digital avatars and virtual reality. Throughout the years, numerous methods have been introduced to synthesize talking heads from audio inputs . Most existing methods focus on image quality and lip synchronization. However, achieving controllable and accurate emotion generation while preserving identity is an important part of realistic talking heads, which has been overlooked by these methods. Early approaches based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) perform well in modeling synchronized lip motion. However, they often fail to preserve the subject’s identity and typically focus on only partial facial regions.

Recent advances in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have demonstrated improvements in both image quality and fidelity for talking-head generation . Several notable NeRF-based approaches have improved lip synchronization while achieving high rendering quality . Additionally, 3D Gaussian Splatting has been recently adopted to synthesize talking-head videos by deforming 3D Gaussian attributes . Despite these advancements, the emotional dimension of generating realistic talking-head videos remains underexplored.

While existing methods have advanced emotional talking-head generation for artificial social intelligence, they face several challenges: 1) **Emotion accuracy**. They struggle to generate accurate emotional expressions, often producing vague or inconsistent results. 2) **Emotion controllability**. Many methods lack fine-grained control over specific emotions, relying on implicit emotional cues from audio or external expression sources. 3) **Identity preservation**. Existing methods struggle to maintain the subject’s identity when emotional expressions are introduced, leading to distortions and loss of key identity features. For example, EAT generates noticeable emotional expressions but suffers from inconsistent regional emotions, facial distortions, and identity loss.

In this paper, we proposed *RealTalk* (Figure <a href="#fig:teaser" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:teaser">[fig:teaser]</a>), a novel emotion-aware talking-head generation framework to address these challenges. To handle the challenge of generating accurate emotions, we leverage facial landmarks as an intermediate representation of audio inputs, proposing a Landmark Deformation Model (LDM) with residual blocks and multi-head self-attention to transform neutral landmarks into accurate emotional landmarks. To enhance emotion controllability, we incorporate emotion labels as additional inputs, enabling precise control over the generated emotions. To address the challenge of identity preservation, we introduce a novel tri-plane NeRF with a landmark attention network to synthesize high-fidelity 3D representations of the subject.

The main contributions of our work are summarized as follows:

- We present a framework for generating realistic audio-driven talking heads with accurate, controllable emotions and preserved identity.

- We introduce a ResNet-based landmark deformation model with self-attention to produce precise and controllable emotional landmarks.

- We propose a novel tri-plane attention NeRF with a landmark attention network to render realistic emotional talking heads with preserved identity.

- Experiments show that our RealTalk outperforms previous works in generating high-quality emotional talking heads.

# Related Work

#### **Talking-Head Generation**

The task of generating audio-driven talking heads has attracted increasing attention over the years . Early methods primarily focused on synchronizing lip movements with the given audio using a static image or video . For instance, Wav2Lip employs a pre-trained lip-sync expert to generate accurate lip movements. However, these methods are often restricted to the lip region, resulting in outputs with reduced realism and poor generalization. Subsequent approaches expanded to full talking-head synthesis . While GAN-based frameworks manage to achieve photorealistic results, they often struggle with inconsistent identity preservation and limited control over pose variations due to inadequate 3D geometry modeling.

To enhance control over pose and facial expressions, several works have adopted landmark-based representations . Many of these methods leverage 3D Morphable Models (3DMM) to capture facial landmark motion . Although landmark representations provide finer control, they can produce additional estimation errors that negatively affect overall quality. To address this, our proposed RealTalk framework leverages 3DMM-based landmarks with semantically informed blendshape coefficients as the intermediate representations, improving both expression accuracy and controllability.

Due to the high-quality rendering performance of NeRF , many recent works leverage NeRF-based architectures in the talking-head generation . Standard NeRF implementations often have high computational costs, but recent advancements have addressed these limitations by employing more efficient NeRF representations, such as hash tables or sparse feature grids , which reduce memory overhead and hash collisions. Building on these developments, RealTalk integrates a tri-plane representation but introduces a novel landmark attention network, enabling more precise and efficient landmark conditioning for improved expression accuracy and social interaction. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has also been explored for talking-head synthesis . Although these approaches offer efficient rendering, they often introduce artifacts and inconsistent results due to their point-based nature. Despite significant progress in NeRF and 3DGS-based methods, the integration of emotion generation remains underexplored.

#### **Emotion-Aware Talking-Head Generation**

Extending on the ideas in the talking-head generation, the emotion-aware talking-head generation aims to produce not only synchronized lip movements but also realistic emotions for enhanced social intelligence. Although previous methods have attempted to incorporate emotion generation into the talking heads , achieving precise and controllable emotions while maintaining the subject’s identity remains challenging. Most of these methods either require an emotional expression source or emotional audio cues , limiting direct control over emotion type and intensity. EAT uses a transformer-based emotion deformation network to generate emotional expressions, but its outputs exhibit identity distortions and mismatched expressions across facial regions. EmoGene generates emotional expressions by using facial landmarks as the intermediate audio representation, deforming them into emotional landmarks for NeRF-based rendering. However, EmoGene’s landmark deformation model struggles to capture and preserve key emotional features, leading to inconsistent emotional landmarks. Additionally, its NeRF rendering quality is affected by insufficient conditional geometry features and inconsistent emotional landmarks. Inspired by this work, we also adopt deformed landmarks as an intermediate audio representation. In contrast to EmoGene, we introduce a ResNet-based LDM with self-attention and a tri-plane NeRF with a landmark attention network to overcome EmoGene’s limitations in landmark consistency and geometry. In this work, we aim to generate emotional talking heads with accurate, controllable emotional expressions and preserved identity, establishing a foundation for socially-intelligent AI avatars.

# Method

<figure id="a2m" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="images/a2m.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>The overview of audio-to-motion VAE.</strong> Dash arrows indicate that the process is only conducted during training.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="pipeline" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="images/pipeline.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>The pipeline of RealTalk.</strong> 1) The audio-to-motion VAE generates the neutral landmark from the input audio (“Lm" is the facial landmark). 2) The landmark deformation model transforms the neutral landmark into emotional landmark using the input emotion label. 3) The tri-plane attention NeRF utilizes the emotional landmarks and blendshape coefficients to generate the realistic emotional talking-head video.</figcaption>
</figure>

In this section, we introduce our proposes RealTalk framework, as shown in Figure <a href="#pipeline" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="pipeline">2</a>. RealTalk mainly consists of three parts: 1) a VAE-based audio-to-motion model that predicts neutral facial landmark from driving audio; 2) a ResNet-based landmark deformation model that transforms the neutral landmark into emotional landmark; 3) a tri-plane attention NeRF that synthesizes a realistic emotional talking-head video from the generated emotional landmarks.

## Audio-to-Motion VAE

We employ a variational autoencoder (VAE) to generate 3D facial landmark from the driving audio, using both audio features and ground truth (GT) facial landmark for training (Figure <a href="#a2m" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="a2m">1</a>).

#### **Audio Encoders**

To capture meaningful audio features, we leverage HuBERT features and pitch embeddings as our audio representations. Each feature set is passed through a dedicated audio encoder, which consists of a convolutional layer with batch normalization and GeLU activation, followed by another convolutional layer. This produces the HuBERT encoding $`h`$ and pitch encoding $`p`$.

#### **VAE Encoder and Decoder**

The encoder and decoder of the VAE are based on convolutional layers with progressively increasing dilation factors inspired by WaveNet , which enables them to generate sequences with different lengths and model temporal dependencies efficiently. At inference time, only the VAE decoder is required to generate the audio-driven landmark $`\hat{l}`$ using the combined audio representations $`h \oplus p`$ and a latent $`z`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \hat{l} = Dec(z, h \oplus p), \quad z \sim N(0, 1).
\end{equation}
```

#### **Glow-based Prior**

To enhance the generative ability of the VAE and ensure a closer alignment between the latent space distribution and the real data distribution, we employ a Glow-based prior as a prior of VAE.

#### **Training Process**

We train the VAE on the audio-visual dataset VoxCeleb2 by extracting audio features and corresponding 3DMM landmark using Deep 3D Face Reconstruction . To guide the training of the VAE, we apply the Monte-Carlo ELBO loss along with a synchronization loss derived from a pre-trained SyncNet . The latter ensures that the generated landmark are aligned with the audio. During the training, SyncNet takes a window of the audio clip and the generated landmark, then it calculates the synchronization score $`s`$ using cosine-similarity:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    s(a, \hat{l}) = \frac{a \cdot \hat{l}}{\|a\|_2 \cdot \|\hat{l}\|_2},
\end{equation}
```
where $`a`$ represents the audio features. Then, SyncNet computes the probability that the audio clip and the generated landmark are synchronized using cross-entropy loss:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{sync}} = - \left[ y \cdot \log (s) + (1 - y) \cdot \log(1 - s) \right].
\end{equation}
```

The total training loss of our audio-to-motion VAE is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{VAE}} = \mathbb{E}\left[\|l - \hat{l}\|_2^2 + KL(z \mid \hat{z}) + \mathcal{L}_{\text{sync}}(a, \hat{l})\right],
\end{equation}
```
where $`l`$ denotes the ground truth landmark, $`\hat{z}=Enc(l, a)`$ is the latent encoding, and $`z \sim N(0, 1)`$. $`KL`$ denotes Kullback–Leibler divergence.

<figure id="m2e" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="images/m2e.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>The overview of landmark deformation model.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="e2v" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="images/e2v.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>The overview of tri-plane attention NeRF.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

## Landmark Deformation Model

To generate consistent emotions, we leverage a ResNet-based landmark deformation model with residual attention to transform the neutral landmark into the emotion-specific landmark, using the discrete emotion labels. As shown in Figure <a href="#m2e" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="m2e">3</a>, the model consists of a feed-forward backbone, two residual blocks, and a residual multi-head attention block.

#### **Feed-Forward Backbone**

Given the neutral facial landmark $`\hat{l} \in \mathbb{R}^{B \times 204}`$ and the emotion label $`e \in \mathbb{R}^{B}`$, where $`B`$ is the batch size, we embed $`e`$ into a 16-dimensional representation and concatenate them with $`\hat{l}`$ to produce a feature vector $`x \in \mathbb{R}^{B \times 220}`$. This is passed through a fully connected (FC) layer with batch normalization (BN) and ReLU activation to produce the hidden representation $`h`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    h = ReLU(BN(FC(x))).
\end{equation}
```

#### **Residual Blocks**

To mitigate the vanishing gradient and preserve the key features, two ResNet-style residual blocks are employed following the feed-forward backbone. As shown in Figure <a href="#m2e" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="m2e">3</a> (b), each residual block comprises two fully connected layers with a skip connection:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    h_{i+1} = ReLU(F(h_i) + h_i),
\end{equation}
```
where $`F(h_i) = BN(FC(ReLU(BN(FC(h_i)))))`$.

#### **Residual Attention Block**

To highlight key features for emotion generation, we treat each hidden representation $`h`$ as a single “token" and apply a residual attention block based on the multi-head self-attention mechanism :
``` math
\begin{equation}
    z_{\text{att}} = \text{MultiHead}(h).
\end{equation}
```

Our multi-head attention consists of four attention heads:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \text{MultiHead}(Q, K, V) = \text{Concat}(\text{head}_1, \dots, \text{head}_4) W^O,
\end{equation}
```
where $`W`$ is the output projection matrix, and each attention $`\text{head}_i`$ is defined as: $`\text{Attention}(Q W^Q_i, K W^K_i, V W^V_i) = \text{softmax}(\frac{(Q W^Q_i)(K W^K_i)^\top}{\sqrt{d_k}}) (V W^V_i)`$.

After the multi-head attention is applied, we utilize a residual skip connection and layer normalization with a 10% dropout probability to preserve the gradients and prevent the degradation of the learned identity mappings, which provides better training efficiency:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    z = LN(Dropout(z_{\text{att}}) + h).
\end{equation}
```

The updated feature $`z`$ passes through two fully connected layers with ReLU activation, followed by a skip connection and layer normalization:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    h_{\text{final}} = LN(Dropout(FC(ReLU(FC(z)))) + h).
\end{equation}
```

By incorporating the residual attention block, it produces an enriched hidden representation that can capture relationships across multiple tokens for better landmark deformation.

#### **Landmark Deformation**

To produce the landmark deformation displacement $`\Delta \hat{l}`$ that maps the neutral landmark to the emotional landmark, a final fully connected layer is applied on $`h_{\text{final}}`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \Delta \hat{l} = FC(h_{\text{final}}).
\end{equation}
```

The resulting emotional landmark $`\hat{l}_E`$ is then obtained by concatenating the neutral landmark $`\hat{l}`$ with the emotional landmark displacement $`\Delta \hat{l}`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
     \hat{l}_E = \hat{l} \oplus \delta \cdot \Delta \hat{l},
\end{equation}
```
where $`\delta`$ is a scalar controlling the deformation magnitude.

#### **Training Process**

In the training process, we train the LDM using emotional-neutral landmark pairs constructed from the MEAD dataset. The generated emotional landmark $`\hat{l_E}`$ is compared with the ground truth emotional landmark $`l_E`$ for the corresponding emotion label. The training loss for the LDM is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
\mathcal{L}_{\text{LDM}} = \mathbb{E}\left[\|l_E - \hat{l_E}\|_2^2\right].
\end{equation}
```

<figure id="hap_sur" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="images/hapsur.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative comparison of generated keyframe results.</strong> Results of <em>happy</em> and <em>surprise</em> are on the left and right. The top row shows the phonetic symbol of the corresponding talking-head results generated by the evaluated methods.</figcaption>
</figure>

<div class="table*">

</div>

## Tri-Plane Attention NeRF

To render high-fidelity emotional talking-head videos, we adopt a tri-plane-based attention NeRF that conditions on the generated emotional landmark and facial blendshape coefficients (Figure <a href="#e2v" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="e2v">4</a>).

#### **Feature Pre-processing**

1\) Following , we extract blendshape coefficients via a Mediapipe-based capture module , focusing on core coefficients that relate closely to facial structure and expressions. 2) We employ an optical flow estimation model to track facial keypoints $`K`$, which are concatenated with the rotation $`R`$ and translation $`T`$ to produce the head pose. 3) To ensure a refined landmark representation, we introduce a landmark attention network consisting of several convolutional layers that learn attention weights to emphasize key landmark regions.

#### **Tri-Plane Attention NeRF**

To mitigate hash collisions in NeRF-based systems, we factorize the 3D spatial feature volume into three 2D hash grids . For coordinates $`\mathbf{x} = (x,y,z) \in \mathbb{R}^{XYZ}`$, each 2D hash encoder projects the 3D point onto a plane:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{H}^{AB} : (a, b) \rightarrow f^{AB}_{ab},
\end{equation}
```
where $`f^{AB}_{ab} \in \mathbb{R}^{LD}`$ is the plane-level geometry feature for the projected coordinate $`(a, b)`$, with $`L`$ levels and $`D`$ dimensions, and $`\mathcal{H}^{AB}`$ is the hash encoder for plane $`\mathbb{R}^{AB}`$. To get the overall geometry feature $`f_x = \mathbb{R}^{3 \times LD}`$, we concatenate the encoded output from the three planes as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    f_x = \mathcal{H}^{XY}(x,y) \oplus \mathcal{H}^{YZ}(y,z) \oplus \mathcal{H}^{XZ}(x,z).
\end{equation}
```

The input to the attention NeRF consists of $`f_x`$, the view direction $`d`$, the conditional features of the emotional landmark $`\hat{l}_E`$, and the blendshape coefficients $`b`$. The implicit function of the tri-plane attention NeRF is defined as:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{F}^{\mathcal{H}} \colon (x, d, \hat{l}_E, b; \mathcal{H}^3) \rightarrow (c, \sigma),
\end{equation}
```
where $`\mathcal{H}^3 \colon x \rightarrow f_x`$ is the integration of the tri-plane hash encoders, $`c`$ is the RGB color, and $`\sigma`$ is the volumn density.

The RGB color $`\hat{C}`$ of each pixel is rendered by aggregating along the ray $`r(t)=o+t \cdot d`$ from the camera origin $`o`$, following the differentiable volume rendering equation :
``` math
\begin{equation}
\hat{C}(r, \hat{l}_E,b) = \int_{t_n}^{t_f} \sigma(r(t), \hat{l}_E, b) \cdot c(r(t), d, \hat{l}_E, b) \cdot T(t) \, dt.
\end{equation}
```
The value of $`\hat{C}`$ is conditioned on $`\hat{l}_E`$ and $`b`$, making it adaptable to diverse emotional expressions and facial identities.

#### **Training Process**

To train the tri-plane attention NeRF, we first extract the landmark and blendshape coefficients from the video frames. Then, we sample random patches $`P`$ from the images and optimize a two-stage coarse-to-fine training with an MSE and LPIPS loss weighted by $`\lambda_{\text{LPIPS}}`$:
``` math
\begin{equation}
    \mathcal{L}_{\text{total}} = \sum_r \|C(r) - \hat{C}\|_2 + \lambda_{\text{LPIPS}} \cdot \mathcal{L}_{\text{LPIPS}}(\hat{P}, P).
\end{equation}
```

# Experiments

<div class="table*">

</div>

#### **Datasets**

We train the audio-to-motion VAE on the VoxCeleb2 dataset , which comprises over one million utterances from 6,112 unique speakers. This extensive coverage enables the model to learn a generalized audio-to-motion mapping. For the landmark deformation model, we employ the MEAD dataset , containing labeled emotional talking videos of 60 subjects, each exhibiting 8 distinct emotions (angry, disgust, contempt, fear, happy, neutral, sad, surprise). We partition MEAD into training and testing sets on a per-identity basis. To train the tri-plane attention NeRF, we use the MEAD dataset along with videos from . Each training video has a duration of 3 to 6 minutes at a resolution of 512x512 resolution and 25 FPS.

#### **Compared Baselines**

We compare our RealTalk with 7 baselines: 1) a GAN-based method Wav2Lip ; 2) a transformer-based method EAT ; 3) three NeRF-based methods (GeneFace++ , SyncTalk , ER-NeRF ); 4) two 3D Gaussian Splatting-based methods (GaussianTalker , TalkingGaussian ).

#### **Implementation Details**

RealTalk is trained on a single NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU. Convergence for the VAE and the landmark deformation model typically occurs around 40K iterations, which takes around 14 hours. The training time of the tri-plane attention NeRF is approximately 2 hours. We set $`\lambda_{\text{LPIPS}}=0.1`$.

## Quantitative Evaluation

#### **Evaluation Metrics**

We adopt the SSIM and PSNR to measure the image quality and fidelity of the generated videos. We use LPIPS to measure the perceptual image similarity of the videos. To evaluate the emotion accuracy score, we calculate the average predicted probability of the target emotion across all video frames using *DeepFace*. We employ the landmark distance of mouth (M-LMD) and face (F-LMD) to measure audio-lip synchronization and expression accuracy.

#### **Evaluation Results**

The results are presented in Table <a href="#table_quant" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="table_quant">[table_quant]</a>. We have the following observations: 1) RealTalk achieves higher image quality and fidelity, outperforming other methods in both SSIM and PSNR. Specifically, while GeneFace++ attains the second-best scores, RealTalk surpasses it by 8.9% in SSIM and 13.2% in PSNR. 2) RealTalk demonstrates higher perceptual image similarity, exceeding the second-best method, TalkingGaussian, by 53.0% in LPIPS. 3) RealTalk achieves higher accuracy in emotional and expression generation, outperforming other methods in both M-LMD and F-LMD. Furthermore, it surpasses the second-best M-LMD and F-LMD by 11.6% and 74.9% respectively. RealTalk performs slightly worse than EAT in emotion score by 3.4%. This may be due to its focus on preserving expression identity and fidelity, which may reduce the intensity of the generated emotions. However, RealTalk still achieves the second-best emotion score among the compared methods, surpassing the third-best method, SyncTalk, by 25.0%.

<figure id="qua_ood" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="images/ood.pdf" />
<figcaption><strong>Qualitative comparison of out-of-domain video generation for “happy" emotions.</strong></figcaption>
</figure>

## Qualitative Evaluation

In Figure <a href="#hap_sur" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="hap_sur">5</a>, we compare the qualitative results of the methods by examining the generated keyframes. We observe that RealTalk stands out by producing high-resolution facial expressions that preserve the target person’s identity and accurately reflect the specified emotion labels, like raised lip corners and relaxed eyes for “happy" and open mouth with raised eyebrows for “surprise." Conversely, EAT struggles with consistent facial features, producing unnatural expressions (e.g., lifted lips but frowned brows for “happy") and distorted faces, causing identity loss. NeRF-based (GeneFace++, SyncTalk, ER-NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting methods (GaussianTalker, TalkingGaussian) offer good reconstruction but poor emotional expression. Wav2Lip ensures lip sync but lacks emotion and produces blurry mouth results.

In addition, we show the qualitative results of the methods on the out-of-domain dataset in Figure <a href="#qua_ood" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="qua_ood">6</a>. RealTalk accurately generates “happy" features like raised lip corners across out-of-domain datasets, while others suffer from identity loss (e.g., EAT), blurry mouths (e.g., Wav2Lip), incorrect lip motion (e.g., GaussianTalker), or exaggerated eyes (e.g., Geneface++), highlighting RealTalk’s effectiveness in producing accurate and identity-preserving emotional expressions.

#### **User Study**

We conducted a user study with 20 participants to evaluate the perceived qualities of the generated videos. For each of the 8 methods, we generated 3 video clips for each of the 8 motion categories, resulting in a total of 192 videos. We employ the Mean Opinion Score (MOS) rating for evaluation, which ranges from 1 (Bad) to 5 (Excellent). The participants are instructed to rate each video based on 4 criteria: 1) emotional accuracy; 2) lip synchronization; 3) video realness; and 4) video quality.

The average scores for each method are presented in Table <a href="#mos" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="mos">[mos]</a>. We have the following observations: 1) RealTalk outperforms the other methods by achieving the highest scores in emotional accuracy, video realness, and video quality, and the overall average score. 2) RealTalk shows slightly lower perceived lip-synchronization accuracy compared to other methods, potentially due to its emotional landmark deformation process, which may affect lip movement alignment with speech when generating emotional landmarks.

## Ablation Study

In this section, we conduct the ablation study to prove the necessity of the proposed components in RealTalk.

#### **Ablation of LDM Components**

We test two settings of the LDM to analyze the impact of its key components (Table <a href="#abla_model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="abla_model">[abla_model]</a>): 1) without the residual attention block, which results in noticeable decreases in SSIM, PSNR, emotion score, LPIPS, and M-LMD; 2) without residual blocks, leading to a drop in performance across all metrics. These results demonstrate the importance of both the residual attention block and the residual blocks in enhancing the performance of LDM in image quality, fidelity, and emotion accuracy.

#### **Ablation of Tri-Plane Attention NeRF Components**

We evaluate two settings of the tri-plane attention NeRF (Table <a href="#abla_model" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="abla_model">[abla_model]</a>): 1) without attention. In this setting, we remove the attention mechanism from the tri-plane attention NeRF; 2) without the tri-plane encoders. In this setting, we remove the three 2D hash encoders and replace them with a unified 3D positional hash encoder. We observe that in both settings, the performance of the NeRF dropped across all metrics, which indicates that the attention mechanism and the tri-plane 2D hash encoders are crucial for strengthening the performance of the NeRF in image quality, fidelity, and emotion accuracy.

#### **Ablation of Landmark Deformation Magnitudes**

To evaluate the impact of the different $`\delta`$ (landmark deformation magnitudes) of the LDM, we ablate six settings: $`\{0, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 1.0\}`$ (Table <a href="#abla_delta" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="abla_delta">[abla_delta]</a>). We notice that the $`\delta`$ of $`0.15`$ provides the best results in SSIM, PSNR, emotion score, and LPIPS. Although the $`\delta`$ value of $`0.3`$ leads to higher M/F-LMD scores, these gains are marginal compared to the overall metrics. Furthermore, all other $`\delta`$ values have lower performance compared to the $`\delta`$ value of $`0.15`$. Therefore, we adopt a $`\delta`$ value of 0.15 in our experiments.

# Conclusion

This paper presents RealTalk, a novel framework for generating realistic emotional talking-head videos with controllable emotions and preserved identity. We propose a landmark deformation model with attention mechanisms to generate robust emotional landmarks, conditioning a tri-plane attention NeRF for rendering lifelike, identity-preserving talking heads. However, RealTalk is limited by predefined emotion categories, restricting its adaptability to complex emotions, and requires per-subject training, limiting scalability. Future work could focus on expanding the emotional training dataset to encompass a wider spectrum of emotions, which may improve the range of generative emotions. To improve scalability, future works could investigate alternative generative methods and refine the underlying architectural components. These advancements could further improve the versatility and efficiency of emotional talking-head generation, paving the way for more dynamic and widely applicable artificial social intelligence.

## References

1. Shivangi Aneja, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nie{\ss}ner.
\newblock Facetalk: Audio-driven motion diffusion for neural parametric head models.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 21263--21273, 2024.
2. Changpeng Cai, Guinan Guo, Jiao Li, Junhao Su, Chenghao He, Jing Xiao, Yuanxu Chen, Lei Dai, and Feiyu Zhu.
\newblock Listen, disentangle, and control: Controllable speech-driven talking head generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07257}, 2024. [arXiv:2405.07257](https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.07257)
3. Bo Chen, Shoukang Hu, Qi Chen, Chenpeng Du, Ran Yi, Yanmin Qian, and Xie Chen.
\newblock Gstalker: Real-time audio-driven talking face generation via deformable gaussian splatting, 2024.
4. Sen Chen, Zhilei Liu, Jiaxing Liu, Zhengxiang Yan, and Longbiao Wang.
\newblock Talking head generation with audio and speech related facial action units, 2021.
5. Kyusun Cho, Joungbin Lee, Heeji Yoon, Yeobin Hong, Jaehoon Ko, Sangjun Ahn, and Seungryong Kim.
\newblock Gaussiantalker: Real-time high-fidelity talking head synthesis with audio-driven 3d gaussian splatting, 2024.
6. Joon~Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman.
\newblock Out of time: automated lip sync in the wild.
\newblock In \emph{Computer Vision--ACCV 2016 Workshops: ACCV 2016 International Workshops, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers, Part II 13}, pages 251--263. Springer, 2017.
7. J.~S. Chung, A. Nagrani, and A. Zisserman.
\newblock Voxceleb2: Deep speaker recognition.
\newblock In \emph{INTERSPEECH}, 2018.
8. Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde Jia, and Xin Tong.
\newblock Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set, 2020.
9. Bernhard Egger, William~AP Smith, Ayush Tewari, Stefanie Wuhrer, Michael Zollhoefer, Thabo Beeler, Florian Bernard, Timo Bolkart, Adam Kortylewski, Sami Romdhani, et~al.
\newblock 3d morphable face models—past, present, and future.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG)}, 39\penalty0 (5):\penalty0 1--38, 2020.
10. C.~Zhang et al.
\newblock Facial: Synthesizing dynamic talking face with implicit attribute learning.
\newblock \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 3867--3876, 2021.
11. Yuan Gan, Zongxin Yang, Xihang Yue, Lingyun Sun, and Yi Yang.
\newblock Efficient emotional adaptation for audio-driven talking-head generation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 22634--22645, 2023.
12. Mandar Gogate, Kia Dashtipour, and Amir Hussain.
\newblock Robust real-time audio-visual speech enhancement based on dnn and gan.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence}, 2024.
13. Y. Guo, K. Chen, S. Liang, Y. Liu, H. Bao, and J. Zhang.
\newblock Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural radiance fields for talking head synthesis.
\newblock \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 5784--5794, 2020.
14. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun.
\newblock Deep residual learning for image recognition, 2015.
15. Fa-Ting Hong, Li Shen, and Dan Xu.
\newblock Dagan++: Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head video generation.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence}, 2023.
16. Fa-Ting Hong, Yunfei Liu, Yu Li, Changyin Zhou, Fei Yu, and Dan Xu.
\newblock Dreamhead: Learning spatial-temporal correspondence via hierarchical diffusion for audio-driven talking head synthesis, 2024.
17. Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis.
\newblock 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering, 2023.
18. Gihoon Kim, Kwanggyoon Seo, Sihun Cha, and Junyong Noh.
\newblock Nerffacespeech: One-shot audio-driven 3d talking head synthesis via generative prior, 2024.
19. Diederik~P. Kingma and Prafulla Dhariwal.
\newblock Glow: Generative flow with invertible 1x1 convolutions, 2018.
20. Dongze Li, Kang Zhao, Wei Wang, Bo Peng, Yingya Zhang, Jing Dong, and Tieniu Tan.
\newblock Ae-nerf: Audio enhanced neural radiance field for few shot talking head synthesis, 2023{\natexlab{a}}.
21. Jiahe Li, Jiawei Zhang, Xiao Bai, Jun Zhou, and Lin Gu.
\newblock Efficient region-aware neural radiance fields for high-fidelity talking portrait synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision}, pages 7568--7578, 2023{\natexlab{b}}.
22. Jiahe Li, Jiawei Zhang, Xiao Bai, Jin Zheng, Xin Ning, Jun Zhou, and Lin Gu.
\newblock Talkinggaussian: Structure-persistent 3d talking head synthesis via gaussian splatting, 2024.
23. Borong Liang, Yan Pan, Zhizhi Guo, Hang Zhou, Zhibin Hong, Xiaoguang Han, Junyu Han, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Expressive talking head generation with granular audio-visual control.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 3387--3396, 2022.
24. Chang Liu, Qunfen Lin, Zijiao Zeng, and Ye Pan.
\newblock Emoface: Audio-driven emotional 3d face animation.
\newblock In \emph{2024 IEEE Conference Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR)}, page 387–397. IEEE, 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
25. Hong Liu, Zhan Chen, and Bing Yang.
\newblock Lip graph assisted audio-visual speech recognition using bidirectional synchronous fusion.
\newblock In \emph{INTERSPEECH}, pages 3520--3524, 2020.
26. Meng Liu, Da Li, Yongqiang Li, Xuemeng Song, and Liqiang Nie.
\newblock Audio-semantic enhanced pose-driven talking head generation.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology}, 34\penalty0 (11):\penalty0 11056--11069, 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
27. Y. Lu, J. Chai, and X. Cao.
\newblock Live speech portraits: Real-time photorealistic talking-head animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics}, 40\penalty0 (220):\penalty0 1--17, 2021.
28. Camillo Lugaresi, Jiuqiang Tang, Hadon Nash, Chris McClanahan, Esha Uboweja, Michael Hays, Fan Zhang, Chuo-Ling Chang, Ming~Guang Yong, Juhyun Lee, Wan-Teh Chang, Wei Hua, Manfred Georg, and Matthias Grundmann.
\newblock Mediapipe: A framework for building perception pipelines, 2019.
29. Ben Mildenhall, Pratul~P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan~T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng.
\newblock Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis, 2020.
30. Thomas M{\"u}ller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller.
\newblock Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding.
\newblock \emph{ACM transactions on graphics (TOG)}, 41\penalty0 (4):\penalty0 1--15, 2022.
31. Federico Nocentini, Claudio Ferrari, and Stefano Berretti.
\newblock Learning landmarks motion from speech for speaker-agnostic 3d talking heads generation, 2023.
32. Ziqiao Peng, Haoyu Wu, Zhenbo Song, Hao Xu, Xiangyu Zhu, Jun He, Hongyan Liu, and Zhaoxin Fan.
\newblock Emotalk: Speech-driven emotional disentanglement for 3d face animation, 2023.
33. Ziqiao Peng, Wentao Hu, Yue Shi, Xiangyu Zhu, Xiaomei Zhang, Hao Zhao, Jun He, Hongyan Liu, and Zhaoxin Fan.
\newblock Synctalk: The devil is in the synchronization for talking head synthesis.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition}, pages 666--676, 2024.
34. K. Prajwal, R. Mukhopadhyay, V. Namboodiri, and C.V. Jawahar.
\newblock A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild.
\newblock \emph{Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, pages 484--492, 2020.
35. Zipeng Qi, Xulong Zhang, Ning Cheng, Jing Xiao, and Jianzong Wang.
\newblock Difftalker: Co-driven audio-image diffusion for talking faces via intermediate landmarks, 2023.
36. X. Ran, M. Xu, L. Mei, Q. Xu, and Q. Liu.
\newblock Detecting out-of-distribution samples via variational auto-encoder with reliable uncertainty estimation.
\newblock \emph{Neural Networks}, 145:\penalty0 199--208, 2022.
37. Yoav Shalev and Lior Wolf.
\newblock End to end lip synchronization with a temporal autoencoder.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)}, 2020.
38. A. Shin, J. Lee, J. Hwang, Y. Kim, and G. Park.
\newblock Wav2nerf: Audio-driven realistic talking head generation via wavelet-based nerf.
\newblock \emph{Image and Vision Computing}, 148, 2024.
39. Kim Sung-Bin, Lee Hyun, Da~Hye Hong, Suekyeong Nam, Janghoon Ju, and Tae-Hyun Oh.
\newblock Laughtalk: Expressive 3d talking head generation with laughter.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)}, pages 6404--6413, 2024.
40. Shuai Tan, Bin Ji, Mengxiao Bi, and Ye Pan.
\newblock Edtalk: Efficient disentanglement for emotional talking head synthesis, 2024{\natexlab{a}}.
41. Shuai Tan, Bin Ji, and Ye Pan.
\newblock Style2talker: High-resolution talking head generation with emotion style and art style.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence}, pages 5079--5087, 2024{\natexlab{b}}.
42. Jiaxiang Tang, Kaisiyuan Wang, Hang Zhou, Xiaokang Chen, Dongliang He, Tianshu Hu, Jingtuo Liu, Gang Zeng, and Jingdong Wang.
\newblock Real-time neural radiance talking portrait synthesis via audio-spatial decomposition.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12368}, 2022. [arXiv:2211.12368](https://arxiv.org/abs/2211.12368)
43. Aaron van~den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu.
\newblock Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio, 2016.
44. Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan~N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin.
\newblock Attention is all you need, 2023.
45. Jianrong Wang, Yaxin Zhao, Li Liu, Tianyi Xu, Qi Li, and Sen Li.
\newblock Emotional talking head generation based on memory-sharing and attention-augmented networks.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03594}, 2023. [arXiv:2306.03594](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.03594)
46. Kaisiyuan Wang, Qianyi Wu, Linsen Song, Zhuoqian Yang, Wayne Wu, Chen Qian, Ran He, Yu Qiao, and Chen~Change Loy.
\newblock Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face generation.
\newblock In \emph{ECCV}, 2020{\natexlab{a}}.
47. Suzhen Wang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, Changjie Fan, and Xin Yu.
\newblock Audio2head: Audio-driven one-shot talking-head generation with natural head motion, 2021.
48. Wenqing Wang and Yun Fu.
\newblock Emogene: Audio-driven emotional 3d talking-head generation.
\newblock In \emph{2025 IEEE 19th International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG)}, pages 1--10, 2025.
49. Wentao Wang, Yan Wang, Jianqing Sun, Qingsong Liu, Jiaen Liang, and Teng Li.
\newblock Speech driven talking head generation via attentional landmarks based representation.
\newblock In \emph{INTERSPEECH}, pages 1326--1330, 2020{\natexlab{b}}.
50. Yifan Xie, Tao Feng, Xin Zhang, Xiangyang Luo, Zixuan Guo, Weijiang Yu, Heng Chang, Fei Ma, and Fei~Richard Yu.
\newblock Pointtalk: Audio-driven dynamic lip point cloud for 3d gaussian-based talking head synthesis, 2024.
51. Shunyu Yao, RuiZhe Zhong, Yichao Yan, Guangtao Zhai, and Xiaokang Yang.
\newblock Dfa-nerf: Personalized talking head generation via disentangled face attributes neural rendering, 2022.
52. Zhenhui Ye, Jinzheng He, Ziyue Jiang, Rongjie Huang, Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, Yi Ren, Xiang Yin, Zejun Ma, and Zhou Zhao.
\newblock Geneface++: Generalized and stable real-time audio-driven 3d talking face generation.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.00787}, 2023{\natexlab{a}}. [arXiv:2305.00787](../2023/2305.00787.md)
53. Zhenhui Ye, Ziyue Jiang, Yi Ren, Jinglin Liu, Jinzheng He, and Zhou Zhao.
\newblock Geneface: Generalized and high-fidelity audio-driven 3d talking face synthesis.
\newblock \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2301.13430}, 2023{\natexlab{b}}. [arXiv:2301.13430](../2023/2301.13430.md)
54. Shuyan Zhai, Meng Liu, Yongqiang Li, Zan Gao, Lei Zhu, and Liqiang Nie.
\newblock Talking face generation with audio-deduced emotional landmarks.
\newblock \emph{IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems}, 35\penalty0 (10):\penalty0 14099--14111, 2024.
55. Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen~Change Loy, Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu.
\newblock Pose-controllable talking face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual representation.
\newblock In \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, pages 4176--4186, 2021.
56. Y. Zhou, X. Han, E. Shechtman, J. Echevarria, E. Kalogerakis, and D. Li.
\newblock Makeittalk: Speaker-aware talking-head animation.
\newblock \emph{ACM Transactions on Graphics}, \penalty0 (221):\penalty0 1--15, 2020.
