---
arxiv_id: '2509.00052'
title: Lightning Fast Caching-based Parallel Denoising Prediction for Accelerating
  Talking Head Generation
authors:
- Jianzhi Long
- Wenhao Sun
- Rongcheng Tu
- Dacheng Tao
submitted: '2025-08-25'
categories:
- cs.GR
- cs.AI
- cs.CV
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.00052
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 21/53
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:13:37+00:00'
references_parsed: 53
arxiv_version: ''
---

<figure id="lcp_pipeline" data-latex-placement="ht">
<embed src="figures/pipeline.pdf" />
<figcaption> The pipeline of the accelerated talking head model. At key timestep <span class="math inline"><em>t</em></span>, we perform full model inference and cache feature <span class="math inline"><em>f</em><sub><em>U</em><sub>31</sub></sub></span>. At non-key timesteps <span class="math inline"><em>t</em> − 1</span> and <span class="math inline"><em>t</em> − 2</span>, we reuse cached <span class="math inline"><em>f</em><sub><em>U</em><sub>31</sub></sub></span> and bypass the encoder (<span class="math inline"><em>D</em><sub>0</sub>, <em>D</em><sub>1</sub>, <em>D</em><sub>2</sub>, <em>D</em><sub>3</sub></span>), midblock <span class="math inline"><em>M</em></span>, and all of the decoder (<span class="math inline"><em>U</em><sub>0</sub>, <em>U</em><sub>1</sub>, <em>U</em><sub>2</sub>, <em>U</em><sub>3</sub></span>) except its last layer <span class="math inline"><em>U</em><sub>32</sub></span>. Moreover, denoising prediction at <span class="math inline"><em>t</em> − 1</span> and <span class="math inline"><em>t</em> − 2</span> can be executed in parallel and further accelerated through decoupled foreground attention. </figcaption>
</figure>

# Method

In this section, we detail the proposed acceleration methods for diffusion-based talking head generation. Our approach introduces Lightning-fast Caching-based Parallel denoising prediction (LCP) and Decoupled Foreground Attention (DFA), significantly reducing inference times while maintaining or even improving video quality. In addition, auxiliary techniques, including input latent estimation and reference feature removal, are proposed to further enhance the visual quality of specific diffusion-based talking head models.

## Lightning-fast Caching-based Parallel Denoising Prediction

As shown in Fig. <a href="#lcp_pipeline" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="lcp_pipeline">1</a>, diffusion-based talking head generation models typically adopt a UNet architecture, with four encoder (downsampling) blocks $`D_{0}, D_{1}, D_{2}, D_{3}`$, a mid-block $`M`$, and four decoder (upsampling) blocks $`U_{0}, U_{1}, U_{2}, U_{3}`$. In each denoising step, the input latent is passed sequentially through the encoder, mid-block, and decoder for denoising prediction. Since this full forward pass is repeated for every diffusion timestep, the process incurs substantial computation cost, especially with large latent diffusion models.

We observe that for most denoising timesteps in talking head generation, all downsampling operations in the encoder and the majority of the upsampling layers in the decoder are redundant. By caching and reusing high-level decoder features across timesteps, it is feasible to bypass the encoder entirely and all but the final upsampling layer of the decoder. As illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:feature_temporal_analysis" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:feature_temporal_analysis">[fig:feature_temporal_analysis]</a>, the input feature $`f_{U_{31}}`$ to the final layer $`U_{32}`$ of the last upsampling block exhibits substantial temporal similarity across consecutive denoising steps. Specifically, Fig. <a href="#f_U31_mse" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="f_U31_mse">[f_U31_mse]</a> depicts the feature $`L_2`$ distance between adjacent timesteps, while Fig. <a href="#f_U31_cosine_similarity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="f_U31_cosine_similarity">[f_U31_cosine_similarity]</a> presents the feature cosine similarity matrix computed across all timesteps. Both metrics confirm that $`f_{U_{31}}`$ maintains high temporal similarity, especially in the middle timesteps. This insight motivates us to cache $`f_{U_{31}}`$ at selected key timesteps and reuse it in subsequent non-key timesteps, significantly reducing computation cost without compromising the fidelity of the generated output.

### Lightning-fast Cache

Motivated by this observation, we propose a lightweight caching strategy termed Lightning-fast Cache, which enables highly efficient inference by partially bypassing the U-Net architecture. Fig. <a href="#lcp_pipeline" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="lcp_pipeline">1</a> shows the pipeline of our proposed method. At each key timestep $`t`$, we execute a full forward pass of the UNet and cache the intermediate feature $`f_{U_{31}}^t`$. Then, for the following non-key timesteps $`t-1`$ and $`t-2`$, we skip all encoder and early decoder computations by reusing the cached $`f_{U_{31}}^t`$.

At non-key timesteps like $`t-1`$, the denoising network $`\epsilon_\theta`$ simplifies to a subnetwork $`\hat{\epsilon}_\theta`$, computing only the final upsampling operation $`U_{32}`$ using the cached $`f_{U_{31}}^t`$ and a lightweight convolution of the current latent $`z_t`$:
``` math
\begin{align}
\epsilon_{t-1} &= \hat{\epsilon}_\theta(f_{U_{31}}^t, z_{t-1}, t-1, c) \\
&= U_{32}(f_{U_{31}}^t, \text{conv}(z_{t-1}), t-1, c)
\end{align}
```
where $`\text{conv}(z_t)`$ denotes a shallow convolution applied to the latent $`z_t`$ to generate the skip-connection input for $`U_{32}`$, and $`c`$ denotes additional conditioning (e.g. audio feature, reference feature).

### Parallel Denoising Prediction

<figure id="fig:input_latents_estimation" data-latex-placement="h">
<figure id="input_latents_mse">
<embed src="figures/timestep_curve_latents.pdf" />
<figcaption>Input latents.</figcaption>
</figure>
<figure id="noise_pred_mse">
<embed src="figures/timestep_curve_noise_pred.pdf" />
<figcaption>Predicted noise.</figcaption>
</figure>
<figcaption> <span class="math inline"><em>L</em><sub>2</sub></span> distance between consecutive timesteps for: (a) input latents, (b) predicted noise. <span class="math inline"><em>t</em><sub><em>t</em><em>h</em><em>r</em><em>e</em><em>s</em><em>h</em></sub></span> is the threshold timestep after which input latents estimation is applied. </figcaption>
</figure>

<span id="parallel_noise_prediction" label="parallel_noise_prediction"></span>

With Lightning-fast Cache, we further accelerate denoising prediction of consecutive non-key timesteps in parallel on multiple GPUs, because inputs of these non-key timesteps share the same cached feature and differ only in their timestep-specific variables.

Given a key timestep $`t`$, we cache the intermediate feature $`f_{U_{31}}^t`$ and reuse it across a block of consecutive non-key timesteps $`\{t-1, t-2, \cdots, t-N\}`$. Then, the denosing equation of non-key timestep $`t-i`$ becomes:

``` math
\begin{equation}
\begin{aligned}
z_{t-1-i} &= \lambda_{t-i} z_{t-i}
+ \tau_{t-i} \cdot \hat{\epsilon}_\theta(f_{U_{31}}^t, z_{t-i}, t-i, c), \\
&\text{s.t.} \ \ \ 1 \le i \le N-1. \\
\end{aligned}
\label{eq:denoising_equation_parallel}
\end{equation}
```

However, there is a key challenge in parallelization: when $`i>1`$, the input latents $`z_{t-i}`$ for each non-key timestep are not available in advance. A straightforward workaround is to approximate all unknown input latents using the latent $`z_{t-1}`$ computed at the key timestep.

Unfortunately, reusing the same input latent $`z_{t-1}`$ across multiple timesteps $`{t-2, ..., t-N}`$ can lead to significant error accumulation, ultimately degrading video quality. As illustrated in Fig. <a href="#input_latents_mse" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="input_latents_mse">2</a>, the feature similarity between consecutive input latents decreases substantially over time when using samplers like DDIM . This compounding discrepancy highlights the risk of not updating the input latents during parallel denoising prediction.

To address this issue, we propose **Input Latents Estimation**, which estimates input latents for consecutive non-key timesteps in parallel prediction by leveraging the temporal feature similarity of the predicted noise. As illustrated in Fig. <a href="#noise_pred_mse" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="noise_pred_mse">3</a>, the predicted noise remain stable across the timesteps where the input latents show increasing discrepancies. Specifically, we use the diffusion scheduler to estimate the input latents $`\hat{z}_{t-2}, ..., \hat{z}_{t-N}`$ for non-key timesteps $`\{t-2, ..., t-N\}`$ using the predicted noise $`\epsilon_\theta(z_{t}, t, c)`$ at key timestep $`t`$ through Eq. <a href="#ILE_step1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ILE_step1">[ILE_step1]</a>, and then use them to compute the actual latents $`\{z_{t-2}, ..., z_{t-N}\}`$ via Eq. <a href="#ILE_step2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="ILE_step2">[ILE_step2]</a>. For timestep $`t-2`$, $`\hat{z}_{t-2}`$ is estimated using the latent $`z_{t-1}`$ computed at key timestep $`t`$; For subsequent timesteps after $`t-2`$, we iteratively estimate input latents $`\hat{z}_{t-i}`$ using the previously estimated latent $`\hat{z}_{t-i+1}`$ as the reference.

``` math
\begin{align}
\hat{z}_{t-i} &= 
\begin{cases}
    \lambda_{t-1} z_{t-1} 
+ \tau_{t-1} \cdot \epsilon_\theta(z_{t}, t, c) & \text{for } i = 2 \\\\
    \lambda_{t-i+1} \hat{z}_{t-i+1}
+ \tau_{t-i+1} \cdot \epsilon_\theta(z_{t}, t, c) & \text{for } i > 2
\end{cases}\label{ILE_step1}\\[1ex]
z_{t-1-i} &= \lambda_{t-i} z_{t-i}
+ \tau_{t-i} \cdot \hat{\epsilon}_\theta(f_{U_{31}}^t, \hat{z}_{t-i}, t-i, c), \label{ILE_step2}\\
&\text{s.t.} \ \ \ 1 \le i \le N-1. \nonumber
\end{align}
```

This two-step refinement allows us to recover higher-quality output latents by using more accurate model inputs. In practice, we apply Input Latents Estimation after a designated threshold timestep $`t_{\text{thresh}}`$. In the early denoising phase ($`t < t_{\text{thresh}}`$), the input latent $`z_t`$ exhibits high similarity across steps, so parallel prediction without correction suffices. Beyond this threshold, the quality benefit of estimating $`\hat{z}_{t-i}`$ becomes significant. Our experiments confirm that Input Latents Estimation greatly improves video fidelity, particularly for high-speed samplers such as DDIM , while incurring negligible extra computation.

## Decoupled Foreground Attention

To further accelerate inference, we propose Decoupled Foreground Attention (DFA) to streamline the reference attention, self-attention in audio module, and temporal attentions in $`U_{32}`$. The computation cost of these attentions scales quadratically with the sequence length of the video tokens, which is as large as $`64 \times 64 = 4096`$ in $`U_{32}`$. To reduce this cost, DFA restricts the attention computation to the foreground components of the input features. This reduction of spatial tokens decrease both query and key length, effectively reducing the attention complexity from $`\mathcal{O}(L^2)`$ to $`\mathcal{O}(L_f^2)`$, where $`L_f`$ is the number of foreground tokens.

Our design is based on two empirical observations:

- **Foreground-Localized Attention:** Foreground attention maps are primarily concentrated within the foreground region, indicating spatial decoupling between dynamic facial motion and static background content. Fig. <a href="#fig:fg_attention_weight_noise" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fg_attention_weight_noise">[fig:fg_attention_weight_noise]</a> and <a href="#fig:fg_attention_weight_reference" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fg_attention_weight_reference">[fig:fg_attention_weight_reference]</a> visualizes this phenomenon in the reference attention module of the upsampling layer $`U_{32}`$. Across all the foreground noisy latent tokens, we calculate the average attention weight sum per token with regard to tokens of 4 distinct groups: foreground noisy latent, background noisy latent, foreground reference feature, and background reference feature. The resulting analysis shows strong localization of attention within foreground tokens and weak correlation between foreground and background tokens.

- **Temporal Redundancy in Background:** Background attention features remain stable across consecutive timesteps, making them suitable for caching and reuse. Fig. <a href="#fig:U32_bg_attention_similarity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:U32_bg_attention_similarity">[fig:U32_bg_attention_similarity]</a> visualizes the $`L_2`$ distance for the background component of the attention output features in the upsampling layer $`U_{32}`$. The analysis on reference (Fig. <a href="#U32_spatial_bg_similarity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="U32_spatial_bg_similarity">[U32_spatial_bg_similarity]</a>), audio (Fig. <a href="#U32_audio_bg_similarity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="U32_audio_bg_similarity">[U32_audio_bg_similarity]</a>), and temporal attentions (Fig. <a href="#U32_temporal_1_bg_similarity" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="U32_temporal_1_bg_similarity">[U32_temporal_1_bg_similarity]</a>) collectively reveal high feature similarity, particularly in the middle denoising timesteps, supporting the strategy of caching background features to reduce computational redundancy.

#### Foreground Masking for Token Reduction.

We use a $`64\times64`$ face segmentation mask to separate the foreground tokens. The mask is downsampled from the reference image’s face segmentation mask, which is obtained using an off-the-shelf face parsing model . Let $`M \in \{0,1\}^{H \times W}`$ denote the binary foreground segmentation mask, where an element value of $`1`$ indicates that the corresponding spatial location belongs to the foreground region. Given flattened attention features $`Q, K, V \in \mathbb{R}^{L \times d}`$, where $`L = H \cdot W`$, we select the foreground token subset as $`Q_\mathcal{F}, K_\mathcal{F}, V_\mathcal{F} \in \mathbb{R}^{L_f \times d}`$, where $`L_f = \| M \|_1 = \sum_{ij} M_{ij}`$.

The attention output is then computed over the reduced foreground region:
``` math
\begin{align}
A_\mathcal{F} = \text{softmax}\left( \frac{Q_\mathcal{F} K_\mathcal{F}^\top}{\sqrt{d}} \right) V_\mathcal{F} \in \mathbb{R}^{L_f \times d}.
\end{align}
```

This leads to a quadratic reduction in attention complexity—from $`\mathcal{O}(L^2)`$ to $`\mathcal{O}(L_f^2)`$—proportional to the foreground token ratio. In reference attention, we apply the same foreground mask to both the noise and reference features. Similarly, in the audio and temporal attentions, the computation is restricted to foreground tokens.

#### Merging with Cached Background.

Once the updated foreground attention output $`A_\mathcal{F}`$ is obtained, we reconstruct the complete attention feature map by merging it with the cached background output $`A_\mathcal{B}^{(t^*)} \in \mathbb{R}^{L_b \times d}`$ from the most recent key timestep $`t^*`$, where $`L_b = L - L_f`$ denotes the number of background tokens. The final combined feature is given by:
``` math
\begin{align}
A = \text{Merge}(A_\mathcal{F}, A_\mathcal{B}^{(t^*)}) \in \mathbb{R}^{L \times d},
\end{align}
```

By narrowing the expensive attentions to the foreground and reusing temporally stable background features, DFA achieves further acceleration with negligible impact on generation quality.

### Reference Feature Removal

Reference attention incurs the highest computation cost in the entire pipeline because the contatenation of reference feature makes the key and value twice as long. Our empirical study shows that reference features in certain layers do not affect video quality, an effect that varies among different talking head models. In our experiments, we apply reference feature removal on all of the tested talking head models to achieve additional acceleration, while maintaining or even improving the video quality.

## References

1. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models
2. Generative adversarial nets
3. Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with dynamic pixel-wise loss
4. SadTalker: Learning Realistic 3D Motion Coefficients for Stylized Audio-Driven Single Image Talking Face Animation
5. Audio2head: Audio-driven one-shot talking-head generation with natural head motion
6. One-shot talking face generation from single-speaker audio-visual correlation learning
7. A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild
8. Deepcache: Accelerating diffusion models for free
9. Faster diffusion: Rethinking the role of unet encoder in diffusion models
10. Progressive distillation for fast sampling of diffusion models [arXiv:2202.00512](https://arxiv.org/abs/2202.00512)
11. On distillation of guided diffusion models
12. Structural Pruning for Diffusion Models [arXiv:2305.10924](https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.10924)
13. Token merging for fast stable diffusion
14. ToDo: token downsampling for efficient generation of high-resolution images [arXiv:2402.13573](https://arxiv.org/abs/2402.13573)
15. Emo: Emote portrait alive generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions
16. Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait image animation [arXiv:2406.08801](../2024/2406.08801.md)
17. Echomimic: Lifelike audio-driven portrait animations through editable landmark conditions [arXiv:2407.08136](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08136)
18. MEMO: Memory-Guided Diffusion for Expressive Talking Video Generation [arXiv:2412.04448](../2024/2412.04448.md)
19. Hallo3: Highly dynamic and realistic portrait image animation with diffusion transformer networks
20. Scalable diffusion models with transformers
21. Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis for character animation
22. Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning [arXiv:2307.04725](https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04725)
23. Magicanimate: Temporally consistent human image animation using diffusion model
24. Denoising diffusion implicit models [arXiv:2010.02502](https://arxiv.org/abs/2010.02502)
25. Dpm-solver: A fast ode solver for diffusion probabilistic model sampling in around 10 steps
26. Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative models
27. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation
28. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models
29. Classifier-free diffusion guidance [arXiv:2207.12598](https://arxiv.org/abs/2207.12598)
30. Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset
31. Mead: A large-scale audio-visual dataset for emotional talking-face generation
32. Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric \& challenges [arXiv:1812.01717](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01717)
33. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium
34. Accurate 3d face reconstruction with weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set
35. face-parsing
36. Efficient Emotional Adaptation for Audio-Driven Talking-Head Generation
37. Ditto: Motion-space diffusion for controllable realtime talking head synthesis [arXiv:2411.19509](../2024/2411.19509.md)
38. Dreamtalk: When expressive talking head generation meets diffusion probabilistic models [arXiv:2312.09767](../2023/2312.09767.md)
39. JoyVASA: portrait and animal image animation with diffusion-based audio-driven facial dynamics and head motion generation [arXiv:2411.09209](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.09209)
40. DAWN: Dynamic Frame Avatar with Non-autoregressive Diffusion Framework for Talking Head Video Generation [arXiv:2410.13726](../2024/2410.13726.md)
41. Anitalker: animate vivid and diverse talking faces through identity-decoupled facial motion encoding
42. Characonsist: Fine-grained consistent character generation
43. Ditctrl: Exploring attention control in multi-modal diffusion transformer for tuning-free multi-prompt longer video generation
44. Kv-edit: Training-free image editing for precise background preservation [arXiv:2502.17363](https://arxiv.org/abs/2502.17363)
45. Global and local semantic completion learning for vision-language pre-training
46. Prospective layout-guided multi-modal online hashing
47. VORTA: Efficient Video Diffusion via Routing Sparse Attention [arXiv:2505.18809](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.18809)
48. T2V-OptJail: Discrete Prompt Optimization for Text-to-Video Jailbreak Attacks [arXiv:2505.06679](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06679)
49. Asymrnr: Video diffusion transformers acceleration with asymmetric reduction and restoration [arXiv:2412.11706](https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.11706)
50. Spagent: Adaptive task decomposition and model selection for general video generation and editing [arXiv:2411.18983](https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.18983)
51. A survey of multimodal-guided image editing with text-to-image diffusion models [arXiv:2406.14555](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14555)
52. Diffusion model-based video editing: A survey [arXiv:2407.07111](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07111)
53. Automatic evaluation for text-to-image generation: Task-decomposed framework, distilled training, and meta-evaluation benchmark
