---
arxiv_id: '2509.21887'
title: 'StableDub: Taming Diffusion Prior for Generalized and Efficient Visual Dubbing'
authors:
- Liyang Chen
- Tianze Zhou
- Xu He
- Boshi Tang
- Zhiyong Wu
- Yang Huang
- Yang Wu
- Zhongqian Sun
- Wei Yang
- Helen Meng
submitted: '2025-09-26'
categories:
- cs.CV
- cs.MM
arxiv_url: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.21887
source: latex
converter: pandoc
llm_remediated: false
citations_resolved: 7/54
citations_resolved_at: '2026-05-04T20:13:15+00:00'
references_parsed: 54
arxiv_version: ''
---

<div class="IEEEkeywords">

Visual Dubbing, Talking Face Generation, Diffusion-based Video Synthesis

</div>

# Introduction

Audio-driven talking face generation aims to produce videos where facial movements are aligned with the driving audio. This technology has a wide range of applications, such as movie dubbing, game character driving, and voice assistant visualization. Based on the form of input and the generalization performance of the model, this field can be categorized into three tasks: person-specific and person-agnostic visual dubbing, and one-shot facial image animation. The visual dubbing modifies the mouth of an input video clip. The person-specific setting requires a certain amount of video to finetune the model, while the person-agnostic setting directly modifies the input video without finetuning. The one-shot facial image animation setting generates the whole head motions from a single input image rather than only editing the lower-half face. This paper focuses on person-agnostic visual dubbing.

<figure id="fig:trump" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/trump.pdf" style="width:45.0%" />
<figcaption>The previous method fails to generate lip movements that simulate the target avatar’s habits, such as Donald Trump’s distinctive lip habit, which is characterized by widely opening the mouth and puckering his lips.</figcaption>
</figure>

Despite the recent advantages in generating audio-synchronized lip movements, existing visual dubbing methods exhibit critical limitations in applicability, particularly concerning speaker-specific lip habit resemblance and occlusion robustness. Firstly, existing methods fail to preserve idiosyncratic lip habits when animating diverse portrait images and speakers (including realistic human, game, or anime characters). As illustrated in Fig. <a href="#fig:trump" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:trump">1</a>, Trump’s lip habits often include a pronounced articulation, characterized by a widening mouth and puckering lips. Such distinctive articulatory signatures are inadequately captured by previous methods . This limitation primarily stems from the synthesis pattern that exclusively rely on single-modal audio signals to drive lip movements, failing to incorporate speaker-dependent visual priors of facial dynamics and cross-modal articulation patterns inherent in individual talking behaviors. Some recent works share a similar goal with ours by modeling person-specific speaking styles from a reference video. However, their reliance on strong facial priors or the need for fine-tuning on target speaker data limits their generalization and applicability.

Secondly, occlusion handling remains a persistent challenge for visual dubbing systems. Current methods show performance degradation when the mouth is partially or completely occluded by objects (e.g., microphones). It usually leads to implausible lip geometries and visual artifacts. This deficiency primarily arises from the native blind inpainting paradigm that employs flawed facial masks to indiscriminately erase mouth regions, subsequently attempting reconstruction while disregarding the presence of occlusion objects.

To address these critical challenges, we propose **StableDub**, a novel and concise framework for generalized visual dubbing that integrates lip habit preservation with occlusion-robust synthesis. Building upon the U-Net-based Stable Diffusion backbone , we develop an audio conditioning and lip-habit-modulated mechanism that jointly models phonemic audio-visual synchronization and speaker-specific lip habits. Unlike prior audio-only methods , our method incorporates dual-modal audio and visual features for enhanced lip synchronization and lip habit resemblance. We introduce the occlusion-aware training strategy with augmented elaborate facial masks that amend the conventional blind inpainting. By strategically applying spatial patch infusion for the masked region during training, the model is explicitly exposed to occlusion objects and thus learns to reconstruct plausible lip geometries and object appearances.

With the enhanced generalization capabilities enabled by these two designs, our method eliminates the necessity of cost-intensive priors in previous methods to ensure identity and lip-sync consistency, which significantly improves training efficiency for the computation-cost diffusion-based backbone. Furthermore, to optimize training efficiency in architecture design, we introduce a hybrid Mamba-Transformer architecture by integrating the emerging Mamba mechanism , renowned for its linear-complexity state-space modeling, to replace the self-attention modules in spatiotemporal computation. This operation further enhances the applicability of visual dubbing methods in low-resource research scenarios. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that StableDub outperforms the state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in lip habit resemblance and occlusion robustness. StableDub also exhibits great generalizability in audio-lip sync, visual quality, and resolution consistency with the original video input.

The main contributions can be summarized as follows:

- Lip habit-aware modeling: a dual-modal framework that synergizes audio-visual cues to preserve speaker-specific lip habits, overcoming the audio-only bias of prior methods by explicitly learning idiosyncratic orofacial patterns.

- Occlusion-robust synthesis: a simple but effective object-aware inpainting process with the well-designed mask augmentation that enables robust mouth reconstruction under occlusion scenarios.

- Enhanced training efficiency: the obtained generalization capability permits removal of redundant priors, while Mamba-based complexity optimization achieves faster spatiotemporal convergence without quality degradation.

- Enhanced applicability: Fig. <a href="#fig:teaser" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:teaser">[fig:teaser]</a> and Tab. <a href="#tab:diff" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:diff">[tab:diff]</a>, as well as extensive experiments, demonstrate that StableDub outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in various aspects and expands the applicability of visual dubbing methods.

# Related Works

<span id="tab:diff" label="tab:diff"></span>

<figure id="fig:fig2" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/method.pdf" style="width:90.0%" />
<figcaption>Given the input video of the target avatar and arbitrary driving audio, StableDub alters the masked mouth region and generates lip movements that match the audio content. To supplement appearance details in the generation process, we concatenate an appearance image with per-frame video latent and send them into the denoising U-Net. To enhance the resemblance of generated lip movements with the target avatar, we extract the habit feature from another lip segment and modulate it with the audio feature. The modulated feature is sent to the audio cross-attention layer in each U-Net block. The spatial and temporal Mamba layers are incorporated to efficiently ensure image quality and video coherence. <u>1</u> or <u>2</u> denotes that the layer is optimized in the training of stage 1 or stage 2.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Audio-Driven Talking Face Generation.** Many works about one-shot facial image animation achieve remarkable results, and are mainly applied for entertainment. The requirement for realism is not stringent. Visual dubbing, on the other hand, is applied in more serious scenarios such as video translation and virtual human live streaming. Previous works are usually trained or finetuned on a specific person to achieve realism comparable to real recordings. With the enhancement of model capabilities and the broader availability of data sources, person-agnostic technology has gradually matured. Some methods use generative adversarial nets (GANs) to improve image quality and employ lip-sync experts to learn audio-to-lip mapping. Recently, some methods introduce diffusion to further improve the quality of generated images. Some latest methods focus on personalized avatar generation by extracting person-specific styles from facial landmarks or expression parameters, but these handcrafted features provide limited representations and cannot fully capture complex facial dynamics and texture variations. The aforementioned methods mostly focus on visual quality, lip sync, and speaking styles, but lack comprehensive consideration of generalization. Most methods define generalization as the model naturally generalizing across different identities, but they rarely consider diverse application scenarios, especially when objects occlude the mouth. Compared to previous works, this paper not only improves visual quality and audio-lip sync but also expands the scope of generalization.

**Diffusion-Based Video Generation.** Recently, significant progress has been made in text-to-video tasks using latent diffusion models. Previous methods typically train the image generative model in a latent space of reduced computational complexity, and then embed temporal layers into the pre-trained structure to generate video clips. Some works adapt similar structures for one-shot image animation, achieving promising results. This paper follows previous works and adapts to the visual dubbing task, achieving efficient training and customized results.

**Efficient Generation with Mamba.** While diffusion models demonstrate remarkable capabilities, the training costs create accessibility barriers for many researchers. Mamba , a novel state space model (SSM), garners widespread attention due to its powerful ability to model long sequence dependencies and high computational efficiency. Mamba introduces a selection mechanism to structured SSM for context-dependent reasoning. Compared to Transformers based on quadratic-complexity attention, Mamba excels at processing long sequences with linear complexity. We utilize Mamba to reduce the computational cost for the visual dubbing task.

**Remark.** Our work diverges from previous methods by pursuing a more stable visual dubbing framework through expanded generalization scope and optimized training efficiency, thereby advancing the practical applicability of visual dubbing methods in diverse real-world scenarios.

# Method

In this section, we present StableDub to achieve generalized and efficient visual-dubbed video generation. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:fig2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fig2">2</a>, given the driving audio $`c_{a}^{1:N}\in\mathbb{R}^{ N \times d}`$ and the input video $`x^{1:N}\in\mathbb{R}^{ N \times c \times h \times w}`$, we randomly select a frame as the appearance image $`x_{app}\in\mathbb{R}^{c \times h \times w}`$, and sample another segment $`c_{h}\in\mathbb{R}^{K \times c \times h \times w}`$ and crop the lip region to provide the lip habit information. StableDub aims to generate the audio-lip synced video $`\hat{x}^{1:N}`$ by inpainting the masked mouth region of the input video. We first describe the preliminaries about the latent diffusion model (LDM) in Sec. <a href="#sec:ldm" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:ldm">3.1</a>, which is the foundation of the proposed method. We demonstrate the exploration of lip habit modeling in Sec. <a href="#sec:habit" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:habit">3.2</a>, the design of occlusion-aware inpainting and the training and inference strategy in Sec. <a href="#sec:loss" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:loss">3.3</a>, and the network efficiency in Sec. <a href="#sec:Mamba-Transformer" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:Mamba-Transformer">3.4</a>.

## Preliminaries

The latent diffusion model performs the diffusion process in the compact latent space rather than the original high-dimensional image space, which greatly reduces computational complexity while maintaining generation quality. Given an input RGB image $`x_0`$, a pretrained VAE encoder $`\mathcal{E}`$ maps it into latent feature $`z_0 = \mathcal{E}(x_0)`$. The forward diffusion process is then applied to produce $`z_t`$ by adding Gaussian noise:
``` math
\begin{align}
z_t=\sqrt{\bar{\alpha_t}}z_0+\sqrt{1-\bar{\alpha_t}}\epsilon,\mathrm{~}\epsilon\thicksim\mathcal{N}(0,I),
\end{align}
```
where $`t\in\{1,2,\ldots,T\}`$ and $`\bar{\alpha_t}`$ denotes the noise strength at step $`t`$. A conditional trainable U-Net-based network $`\epsilon_\theta`$ then learns the denoising process by predicting the added noise. The training objective of the conditional LDM is defined as
``` math
\begin{align}
\mathcal{L}_{LDM}=\mathbb{E}_{z_0, c, \epsilon, t}[\|\epsilon-\epsilon_\theta(z_t, t, c)\|_2^2],
\end{align}
```
where $`c`$ is the condition. At inference, $`z_T`$ is sampled from random Gaussian distribution and is progressively denoised and restored to $`\hat{z}_0`$ via deterministic sampling process. $`\hat{z}_0`$ is then decoded by the VAE decoder $`\mathcal{D}`$ to reconstruct the image $`\hat{x}_0 = \mathcal{D}(\hat{z}_0)`$. The proposed model extends a pre-trained conditional LDM for image generation to video generation by introducing temporal layers and audio-related layers.

## Lip Habit Modulated Audio Feature

<figure id="fig:adaLN" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/habitmodule.pdf" style="width:45.0%" />
<figcaption>Lip habit modulation module transfers the lip habit to the audio feature. The output is connected to the denoising net with zero 1D convolution for better initialization.</figcaption>
</figure>

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:trump" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:trump">1</a>, generating lip movements consistent with the target avatar’s lip habit is crucial for realistic visual dubbing. To enhance lip habit resemblance and ensure synchronization, we propose a lip habit modulation module. We extract audio features $`f_{audio}`$ with Wav2Vec audio encoder and image-level lip habit features $`f_{habit}`$ with VIT-based lip encoder. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:adaLN" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:adaLN">3</a>, they are processed separately by convolution and pooling layers to obtain $`a \in \mathbb{R}^{ T \times C}`$ and $`v \in \mathbb{R}^{C}`$. Note that the input audio feature and lip habit segment are sampled from distinct segments in a video clip, and the lip-related feature $`v`$ is a global vector. Thus $`v`$ does not contain any audio-related information and is primarily optimized to represent lip movement habits. The adaptive layer normalization (AdaLN) is then employed to modulate the audio signal in accordance with the lip habit, which can be formulated as
``` math
\begin{align}
\mathrm{AdaLN}(a,v)=(\frac{a-\mu(a)}{\sigma(a)})\mathrm{MLP_1}(v)+ \mathrm{MLP_2}(v),
\end{align}
```
where MLP denotes linear layer. This lightweight module is inspired by AdaLN for image style transfer . To further facilitate the audio-synced generation, the AdaLN output is added with $`a`$ multiplied by a learnable vector $`\lambda`$. We also experimented with injecting lip habits via cross-attention, but found that AdaLN achieves comparable performance while requiring significantly lower memory and computational cost. This observation is consistent with findings from concurrent work that utilize AdaLN for facial identity customization.

The output feature $`f_{audio}^{mod}`$ is injected into the denoising net by computing cross-attention with the latent denoising feature $`z_t`$. This computation can be formulated as
``` math
\begin{align}
\text{CrossAtten}(z_t, f_{audio}^{mod}) = softmax(QK^{\top} / \sqrt{d_k})V,
\end{align}
```
where $`Q=W_{Q}z_t`$, $`K=W_{K}f_{audio}^{mod}`$, $`V=W_{V}f_{audio}^{mod}`$, and $`d_k`$ denotes the latent dimension for cross attention. The zero-initlized 1D convlutional layer is for better initilization at the beginning of training without damaging the backbone performance. Here we adopt attention instead of Mamba since we empirically find that a hybrid Mamba-Attention network achieves better performance. Recent studies on the Mamba architecture have similar conclusions. In the training stage, we randomly drop the audio and lip habit features with a drop probability of 0.1. This is to ensure robust audio-synced lip generation and lip habit learning. During inference, the lip habit segment is random sampled and shuffled from the input video and will not damage the lip sync.

## Occlusion-Aware Inpainting

<figure id="fig:mask" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/mask_loss.pdf" style="width:45.0%" />
<figcaption>Illustration of facial masks. For the mask exposure operation, yellow patches denote unmasked regions exposed to inpainting, enabling occlusion-aware training. We define the ratio between the exposed patch area and the union mask area as the exposure rate. It is initialized at 70% and progressively decreased to 0% during training.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Facial Masks.** As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:mask" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:mask">4</a>, we derive the coarse masks and union mask to facilitate the denoising process. Most previous works independently detect the tight face bounding box in each frame of the video as the input region and mask the lower half of the box for inpainting. Even when adopting temporal modules, this operation still damages the continuity of the generated video, especially in cases of static occlusions, because the input video frames have noticeable jumps. StableDub first detects face landmarks for each frame to obtain a detailed mask, which precisely locates the lip and jaw. Then, we erode each detailed mask to obtain a coarse mask $`M_c`$ to eliminate the mouth estimation inaccuracy . We union the height and width of each $`M_c`$ in the video segment and blurred the boundaries, resulting in a union facial mask $`M_u`$ that only indicates the approximate position of the mouth. This removes the jaw movement related to audio. Some works take similar union operations. The inputs to the denoising net are frames with fixed and much larger boundaries expanded by $`M_u`$, which ensures that the input frames are a continuous signal. When the mouth is occluded by an object, larger-area and multi-frame inputs can assist the network in predicting the shape of the object in the masked region from the surrounding areas.

**Progressive Mask Exposure.** Although expanding the inpainted regions enables the network to better perceive object existence, the inpainting process remains inherently blind since the visual appearance of objects in masked regions remains unknown. To address this, we propose a simple yet effective operation that actively exposes occluders to the inpainting process during training. For the union mask shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:mask" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:mask">4</a>, we partition it into patches and randomly unmask a certain percentage of these patches. The unmasked regions may reveal partial appearances of occluders, enabling the inpainting process to infer their complete appearance from these visible clues. We implement a progressive mask exposure strategy to guide occlusion-robust learning. Initially setting the exposure ratio to 70%, the network learns through copy-paste operations to reduce learning difficulty. As training progresses, this ratio gradually decreases to 0%, forcing the network to deduce object appearances from other regions elsewhere in the image.

**Loss Function.** Only the denoising loss $`\mathcal{L}_{LDM}`$ may not contribute to accurate lip movements . Previous methods usually employ a lip-reading expert or computing spatial loss in the full pixel space . To avoid additional training overhead, we impose constraints in the latent space of the VAE, as we find that the VAE-encoded features preserve the spatial relationships of the original image. In the meantime, to enhance the attention of the denoising net on the lower-half face, we propose the latent coarse facial loss with the coarse facial mask $`M_{c}`$:
``` math
\begin{align}
\mathcal{L}_{LCF}=\mathbb{E}[\|&\epsilon-\epsilon_\theta(\bar{z}_t^{1: N}, t, c_{a}^{1:N},c_{h})\|_2^2\otimes M_c] \\ \notag
&\bar{z}_t^{1: N}=(z_t ^{1: N} \otimes M_u) \textcircled{c} z_{app},
\end{align}
```
where $`\otimes`$ is Hadamard production and $`\textcircled{c}`$ is frame-wise concatenation. $`z_{app}`$ denotes the VAE latent of the appearance image. The total training loss can be written as:
``` math
\begin{align}
&\mathcal{L}_{total}=\mathcal{L}_{LDM} + \mathcal{L}_{LCF}.
\end{align}
```

**Classifier-Free Guidance.** We randomly drop audio and lip conditions in training. During inference, we introduce two guidance scales $`\lambda_{a}`$ and $`\lambda_{h}`$ and separately replace each condition with zero embedding $`\varnothing`$ to trade off the impact of these two control signals:
``` math
\begin{align}
\hat{\epsilon}_\theta(\bar{z}_t, c_a,c_h) &= \epsilon_\theta(\bar{z}_t, \varnothing,\varnothing)\\ \notag
&+\lambda_{a}(\epsilon_\theta(\bar{z}_t, c_a,\varnothing) - \epsilon_\theta(\bar{z}_t, \varnothing,\varnothing)) \\ \notag
&+\lambda_{h}(\epsilon_\theta(\bar{z}_t, c_a,c_h) - \epsilon_\theta(\bar{z}_t, c_a,\varnothing)).
\end{align}
```

## Efficient Network

The introduced lip-habit modulation and occlusion-aware inpainting significantly enhance the generalization capability. In experiments, we empirically find that even when removing the prior modules for identity consistency and lip sync adopted in previous works, the model maintains robust preservation of facial identity across diverse input avatars while achieving precise audio-visual sync with various speech inputs. This architectural simplification substantially improves the training efficiency of the computationally intensive diffusion-based model without compromising generation quality.

<figure id="fig:process" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/dataprocess.pdf" style="width:49.0%" />
<figcaption>Illustration of data filtering and preprocessing. Qualified face videos without audio can be utilized in training of stage 1, while audio-synced videos are utilized in stage 2.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Removal of ReferenceNet.** Recent SD-based methods adopt a Dual U-Nets architecture. They try to extract the appearance by a cloned referenceNet, and inject it into the backbone U-Net for identity-preserved video generation. However, it introduces additional unnecessary optimization parameters. This paper removes the referenceNet. Besides, text input in the original Stable-Diffusion backbone is also removed, as this information is already provided by the appearance image. This removal reduces the network parameter count from 1.6B to 987M, significantly decreasing the parameter count by 40%.

**Removal of SyncExpert.** For lip sync assurance, conventional visual dubbing methods rely heavily on SyncExpert , as it significantly improves audio-lip sync on objective metrics. However, SyncExpert introduces two critical limitations: (1) SyncExpert scores conflict with human perceptual judgments, and (2) SyncExpert’s requirement to backpropagate losses at the RGB level complicates integration with latent-space-based diffusion models while incurring substantial training overhead. This work eliminates SyncExpert dependencies by directly computing loss in the latent space, achieving equivalent synchronization performance while reducing memory overhead and accelerating training convergence.

**Hybrid Mamba-Transformer Architecture.** Previous methods usually employ Transformer to capture spatial and temporal patterns in video. Despite the impressive progress of these methods, the quadratic complexity of the attention mechanism in Transformer limits the image size and video length for inputs. Therefore, to further improve the computational efficiency of the model, this work replaces the self-attention layers in the denoising U-Net with Mamba-based layers . For the input feature map $`z\in\mathbb{R}^{b\times N \times c \times h \times w}`$, the spatial Mamba handles the spatial dependencies along $`h \times w`$ dimension while the temporal Mamba operates on $`N`$ dimension. Attributable to the incorporation of Mamba layers, memory consumption for longer video inputs is reduced by 23%, and the supported batch size is increased by 25%, compared to a baseline model fully built with self-attention and cross-attention layers, which is similar to prior works MuseTalk and LatentSync .

# Experiments

<figure id="fig:fig4" data-latex-placement="!t">
<embed src="fig/fig4.pdf" style="width:100.0%" />
<figcaption>Qualitative comparison with other methods on the self-reenactment and cross-audio dubbing settings. There exists no ground truth for the cross-audio dubbing setting, so we mask the lower-half face. The first row displays the words that these frames are pronouncing. Please zoom in for clearer observation.</figcaption>
</figure>

## Experimental Settings

**Training Dataset.** As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:process" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:process">5</a>, we obtain a high-quality and diverse dataset by filtering VoxCeleb2 . All video clips are first resampled to 25 fps. Video clips of low clarity and with multiple people are directly discarded. We filter out clips with excessive head transitions, large head angles, or small facial sizes. Clips with low audio-lip synchronization and background noise are also removed. These preprocessing steps leave approximately 225 hours of paired audio-video data. We crop and resize each video clip to 512$`\times`$<!-- -->512.

**Test Datasets.** We evaluate methods on multiple datasets. Besides the commonly used HDTF and LRS2 datasets, we select more challenging video clips with high-resolution and difficult scenes (*e.g.,* mouth occluded by objects) from the VFHQ dataset to test high-resolution video quality and generalization ability. We refer to this testset as VFHQ-C.

<div class="table*">

<span id="tab:table1" label="tab:table1"></span> <span id="tab:quantitative" label="tab:quantitative"></span>

</div>

<figure id="fig:diffusion_compare" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/diffusion_compare.pdf" style="width:46.0%" />
<figcaption>Visual comparison with the latest methods of similar architectures <span class="citation" data-cites="musetalk_2024 latentsync2025"></span> and diffusion-based methods <span class="citation" data-cites="diffdub_2024 latentsync2025"></span>.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Implementation Details.** The training consists of two stages. In the first stage, we reserve video with low sync since only images are needed. We train the spatial Mamba layer in each U-Net block with 36 million images to ensure the model generates high-quality and generalizable results. In the second stage, we freeze the spatial Mamba and only optimize the audio cross-attention and temporal Mamba layers. The sequence length during training is set to $`N=16`$ to maximize the modeling of video consistency. We adopt a similar U-Net design with Stable-Diffusion , except for the Mamba layer. To achieve faster convergence and leverage the strong generalization capability of Stable-Diffusion, we initialize the convolution and residual nets between the Mamba and attention layers and the cross-attention layer with the pre-trained weights of Stable-Diffusion. We train the model on 8 NVIDIA V100 GPUs. The training of the first stage takes 12 hours and the second stage takes 20 hours. Such training requirements are accessible for most researchers.

**Baseline Methods.** The proposed method is for the person-agnostic visual dubbing task. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:teaser" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:teaser">[fig:teaser]</a>, we compare StableDub with many code-available state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods. For conciseness, we report results of the five methods with the best overall performance. Their visualizations are presented in Fig. <a href="#fig:fig4" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fig4">6</a>, while objective metrics and user study results are summarized in Tab. <a href="#tab:quantitative" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:quantitative">[tab:quantitative]</a> and Tab. <a href="#tab:user_study" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:user_study">1</a>. 1) Wav2Lip proposes to adopt a pre-trained lip-sync expert to enforce accurate, natural lip motion generation. 2) DINet performs spatial deformation on feature maps for better facial textural details. 3) IP-LAP aligns multiple reference images with the target expression and pose for better appearance rendering. 4) TalkLip adopts a lip-reading expert to improve the intelligibility of the generated lip regions. 5) Diff2Lip is the latest audio-conditioned diffusion-based model for in-the-wild visual dubbing.

<div id="tab:user_study">

| Method | VQ$`\uparrow`$ | R&S$`\uparrow`$ | OR$`\uparrow`$ |
|:---|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| Wav2Lip | 3.26$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.23 | 3.59$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.29 | 3.70$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.19 |
| DINET | 2.48$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.24 | 2.96$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.24 | 2.62$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.22 |
| IP-LAP | 3.89$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.23 | 3.87$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.17 | 3.61$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.20 |
| TalkLip | 3.15$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.28 | 3.20$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.29 | 3.34$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.29 |
| Diff2Lip | 3.58$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.21 | 3.74$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.23 | 3.77$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.21 |
| Ground Truth | 4.87$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.10 | 4.82$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.15 | 4.94$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.09 |
| StableDub | **4.71$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.18** | **4.67$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.20** | **4.81$`\pm`$<!-- -->0.14** |

User study measured by MOS with 95% confidence intervals. VQ: visual quality. R&S: lip habit resemblance and audio lip sync. OR: occlusion robustness.

</div>

<span id="tab:table2" label="tab:table2"></span> <span id="tab:user_study" label="tab:user_study"></span>

## Quantitative Results

We evaluate the self-reenactment and cross-audio dubbing tasks separately. For the former, the driving audio and input video are paired, while for the latter, the driving audio comes from another source. The latter has no corresponding ground-truth video, which is closer to real applications.

**Evaluation Metrics.** Following previous methods , we adopt the commonly used LPIPS and FID to evaluate image quality. LSE-D and LSE-C by SyncNet and word error rate (WER) by an audio-visual speech recognition method measure the audio-lip sync. Landmark distance (LMD) on the mouth region can reflect the resemblance to the target lip habit and lip sync. To evaluate video consistency, we compute FVD on 5-second video clips.

**Evaluation Results.** The quantitative results are shown in Tab. <a href="#tab:table1" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:table1">[tab:table1]</a>. The proposed method achieves the lowest LPIPS and FID scores for both self-reenactment and cross-audio dubbing tasks on the VFHQ-C testset, which demonstrates that StableDub obtains better generalization ability and generates images of higher quality. The proposed method also gains the lowest FVD score, which suggests that StableDub effectively preserves temporal consistency. For the audio-lip sync, we gain comparable and even better LSE-C and LSE-D scores than Wav2Lip, DINet, TalkLip and Diff2Lip, although they directly employ SyncNet for optimization. The lower WER score confirms the superior audio-lip sync of StableDub. It is worth noting that the proposed method shows more significant advantages in the cross-audio dubbing task, demonstrating its effectiveness in real applications. The lowest LMD score in the self-reenactment task suggests that our method can effectively mimic the lip movement habit of the target avatar.

<figure id="fig:fig5" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/fig5.pdf" style="width:46.0%" />
<figcaption>Visual comparison about object occlusion and uneven illumination under the cross-audio dubbing setting.</figcaption>
</figure>

**User Study.** Current objective metrics for evaluating lip habit resemblance and occlusion robustness exhibit significant discrepancies compared to human perceptual assessment. We therefore employ user studies to better capture model performance. Thirty users with professional English ability participate in this study. The mean-opinion-score (MOS) tests are employed by asking users to score each video from one (worst) to five (best) on the aspects of visual quality, lip habit resemblance, audio-lip sync and occlusion robustness. As shown in Tab. <a href="#tab:table2" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:table2">[tab:table2]</a>, IP-LAP and Diff2Lip achieve relatively high scores on visual quality and occlusion resemblance, while Wav2Lip can generalize to the challenging cases in VFHQ-C. The proposed method outperforms other methods on all aspects, proving the superiority of StableDub. The scores for lip habit resemblance and lip sync are remarkably close, thus we combine these two metrics. This also indicates that capturing lip habits contributes to enhancing lip sync.

## Qualitative Results

**Visual Comparisons.** Fig. <a href="#fig:fig4" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fig4">6</a> shows the visual comparison results. In terms of image quality, by closer inspection, our method is noticeably sharper and closer to the ground truth compared with other methods. Previous methods always have flaws in generating teeth, but StableDub can generate clear and realistic teeth. This results from the large-scale image pre-training in the first stage. For audio-lip sync and habit resemblance, our method shows more pronounced mouth opening and stronger expressiveness when pronouncing vowels in words like “having”, “doing”, and “work”, proving that our method can generate accurate and vivid mouth movements. For the occlusion robustness, due to design flaws in masks and smaller generating areas, other methods often predict strange deformations of the microphone and mouth. However, our method generates a complete microphone and accurate mouth movements, handling the occlusion relationship between the mouth and microphone well. Fig. <a href="#fig:fig5" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fig5">8</a> shows more details and also provides an example of the face under uneven lighting conditions to demonstrate stability.

To further demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method, we compare it with recent open-source methods, including MuseTalk (with a similar model architecture), DiffDub (diffusion-based), and LatentSync (diffusion combined with a SyncNet expert), as illustrated in Fig.<a href="#fig:diffusion_compare" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:diffusion_compare">7</a>. It can be observed that, with microphone occlusions, StableDub generates realistic and natural lip movements as well as complete occluding objects. Compared with LatentSync, StabldDub achieves superior audio-lip sync and visual quality with more expressive lip movements and clearer articulation of teeth.

As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:specific" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:specific">9</a>, we also compare with the SOTA person-specific method that captures the personalized lip habit during training, and the latest dual U-Nets-based one-shot animation method . Our proposed method generates similar lip movements with SyncTalk, which verifies the habit modeling capability. Our method gains even better visual quality compared with Hallo. This shows the efficiency and generalization of StableDub.

**Visualization of Lip Habit Embeddings.** We randomly select 6 speakers from the HDTF dataset and extract corresponding lip habit embeddings from their ground-truth videos. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:tsne" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:tsne">11</a>, the t-SNE visualization of these embeddings reveals separation between different speakers’ habit patterns while maintaining tight intra-speaker clustering. This empirical evidence demonstrates our method’s capability to effectively preserve target-specific talking habits.

<figure id="fig:specific" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/hallo.pdf" style="width:45.0%" />
<figcaption>Comparison with dual U-Nets-based one-shot method Hallo <span class="citation" data-cites="hallo_2024"></span> and person-specific method SyncTalk <span class="citation" data-cites="synctalk_2024"></span>. SyncTalk shows the training results.</figcaption>
</figure>

<div id="tab:table3">

| Setting | FID$`\downarrow`$ | FVD$`\downarrow`$ | LMD$`\downarrow`$ |
|:---|:--:|:--:|:--:|
| StableDub | **7.0433** | **34.8793** | **0.655** |
| Dual U-Nets | 7.0519 | 34.8904 | 0.692 |
| w/o Mask Exposure | 7.1046 | 36.5170 | 0.725 |
| w/o Habit Modulation | 7.0579 | 34.9100 | <u>0.810</u> |
| Mamba $`\rightarrow`$ Attention | <u>7.1704</u> | 36.5026 | 0.691 |
| w/o Temporal Mamba | 7.1109 | <u>49.2208</u> | 0.703 |

Ablation study on generalization ability. The <u>operations</u> that cause the most significant performance degradation in each aspect are underlined.

</div>

<span id="tab:table3" label="tab:table3"></span>

<figure id="fig: ablation_vis" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/ablation_vis.pdf" style="width:40.0%" />
<figcaption>Visualization for ablation study. Our full model generates high-quality and detailed images.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:tsne" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/tsne.pdf" style="width:49.0%" />
<figcaption>The t-SNE visualization of extrated lip habit embeddings. Points of different colors indicate different speakers.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Out-Domain Generation.** StableDub also demonstrates strong stability for out-of-domain audio and facial images. As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:fig6" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:fig6">12</a>, we test our method on “*Frozen*”, an American English animated musical fantasy film. We input the Chinese singing audio for testing. Our method not only inpaints the images with the film style but also matches the lip movements with the Chinese singing. This indicates that our method can perform video translation or dubbing beyond realistic human portraits. We also test our method in an interesting scenario of redubbing the characters in the action-adventure 3D game “*The Last of Us*”, since traditional game creation usually employs motion capture for lip-driving, which is expensive and lacks accuracy. Our method not only generates more accurate and expressive lip movements than the original video but also provides realistic and natural detail enhancements in regions like teeth. This result shows that our method has the potential to be used in pipelines for refining 3D game character animations to enhance user experience.

## Ablation Study

<figure id="fig:fig6" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/fig6.pdf" style="width:46.0%" />
<figcaption>Out-domain generation. Left: Chinese dubbed “<em>Frozen</em>”. Right: original audio redubbed “<em>The Last of Us</em>”. StableDub corrects motion capture artifacts in the original video.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Generlization Ability.** As shown in Tab. <a href="#tab:table3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:table3">2</a>, we test different model settings separately. 1) We adopt the dual U-Nets structure with an additional referenceNet to extra and inject appearance features. It can be observed increasing the parameter count does not result in a significant performance improvement. 2) We remove the strategy of mask exposure. The rise in LMD indicates that the strategy also results in better lip sync. 3) Removing the lip habit modulation module leads to a significant LMD rise. It proves the necessity for lip habit awareness. 4) Replacing all Mamba layers with attention results in degraded image quality. We attribute the quality gains to Mamba’s ability to support larger batch sizes and longer sequences during training. More stable optimization and extended video context contribute to improved visual fidelity. 5) Removing the temporal Mamba layer increases FVD, leading to a decline in video consistency. Fig. <a href="#fig: ablation_vis" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig: ablation_vis">10</a> shows the visual results of the ablation study. Removing the strategy of mask exposure leads to distorted images.

<figure id="fig:train_curve" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/trainFIDCurve.pdf" style="width:43.0%" />
<figcaption>Curves of training convergence. The parameter counts are given next to the corresponding model structures.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure id="fig:supp3" data-latex-placement="t">
<embed src="fig/supp_limitation.pdf" style="width:48.0%" />
<figcaption>Failure cases of StableDub and Diff2Lip.</figcaption>
</figure>

**Training Efficiency.** Fig. <a href="#fig:train_curve" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:train_curve">13</a> shows the curves of training convergence for different model structures and their corresponding parameter counts. The dual U-Nets structure has the largest number of parameters, but under the same training steps, it struggles to converge to the same FID value as StableDub. Replacing Mamba with attention results in a significant decline in convergence speed, demonstrating the advantages of the hybrid Mamba-Attention net. Removing the lip habit modulation module also leads to the slower convergence speed of FID. This is due to the absence of a reference for the generation of the lip region, requiring a longer optimization time. As shown in Table <a href="#tab:diff" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="tab:diff">[tab:diff]</a>, our method demonstrates superior efficiency by eliminating redundant priors in other works, employing a more concise framework, and reducing training overhead, while simultaneously achieving enhanced generation performance. In line with the discussion in Sec. <a href="#sec:Mamba-Transformer" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="sec:Mamba-Transformer">3.4</a>, the proposed method leverages a relatively large network parameter count and effectively balances generalization and training efficiency.

# Limitations

StableDub achieves SOTA results in the person-agnostic visual dubbing task, but it still has some limitations. (1) As shown in Fig. <a href="#fig:supp3" data-reference-type="ref" data-reference="fig:supp3">14</a>, the background is not well preserved. This is because our method employs a larger mask and renders a larger region, which reduces the perception of complex backgrounds. Another contributing factor is that only a single reference image is used. Employing multiple reference images could mitigate this issue. We will explore jointly adopting masks of different scales and leverage multiple reference images for improved visual fidelity and generalizability. (2) Although diffusion methods can achieve better generation quality than GANs , the inference speed is inferior to that of GANs. We believe that exploring acceleration methods for diffusion networks will further expand the application scope of our method.

# Conclusion

This paper focuses on enhancing the applicability of visual dubbing methods through improvements in generalization and efficiency. The proposed lip habit-aware modeling enables the generated avatar to preserve the original speaker’s articulatory patterns, while occlusion-aware inpainting ensures natural visual outputs even under occluded scenarios. These generalization enhancements eliminate the reliance on redundant prior required by previous methods. Combined with the hybrid Mamba-Transformer architecture, the framework achieves enhanced computational efficiency. Extensive experiments and analyses demonstrate that StableDub outperforms other methods across multiple dimensions. This comprehensive advancement improves the practical applicability of visual dubbing systems for real-world deployment.

[^1]: Manuscript under review.

## References

1. A.~Lahiri, V.~Kwatra, C.~Frueh, J.~Lewis, and C.~Bregler, ``Lipsync3d: Data-efficient learning of personalized 3d talking faces from video using pose and lighting normalization,'' in \emph{IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)}, 2021, pp. 2754--2763.
2. Z.~Peng, W.~Hu, Y.~Shi, X.~Zhu, X.~Zhang, H.~Zhao, J.~He, H.~Liu, and Z.~Fan, ``{ SyncTalk: The Devil is in the Synchronization for Talking Head Synthesis },'' in \emph{CVPR}, Jun. 2024, pp. 666--676.
3. L.~Chen, W.~Bao, S.~Lei, B.~Tang, Z.~Wu, S.~Kang, H.~Huang, and H.~Meng, ``Adamesh: Personalized facial expressions and head poses for adaptive speech-driven 3d facial animation,'' \emph{IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, pp. 1--12, 2025.
4. S.~Shen, W.~Li, X.~Huang, Z.~Zhu, J.~Zhou, and J.~Lu, ``Sd-nerf: Towards lifelike talking head animation via spatially-adaptive dual-driven nerfs,'' \emph{IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, vol.~26, pp. 3221--3234, 2024.
5. K.~R. Prajwal, R.~Mukhopadhyay, V.~P. Namboodiri, and C.~Jawahar, ``A lip sync expert is all you need for speech to lip generation in the wild,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia}, 2020, p. 484–492.
6. W.~Zhong, C.~Fang, Y.~Cai, P.~Wei, G.~Zhao, L.~Lin, and G.~Li, ``Identity-preserving talking face generation with landmark and appearance priors,'' in \emph{CVPR}, June 2023, pp. 9729--9738.
7. S.~Mukhopadhyay, S.~Suri, R.~Gadde, and A.~Shrivastava, ``Diff2lip: Audio conditioned diffusion models for lip-synchronization,'' in \emph{2024 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)}, 2024, pp. 5280--5290.
8. D.~Yaman, F.~I. Eyiokur, L.~Bärmann, H.~K. Ekenel, and A.~Waibel, ``Audio-driven talking face generation with stabilized synchronization loss,'' in \emph{ECCV}, 2024.
9. J.~Guan, Z.~Zhang, H.~Zhou, T.~Hu, K.~Wang, D.~He, H.~Feng, J.~Liu, E.~Ding, Z.~Liu, and J.~Wang, ``Stylesync: High-fidelity generalized and personalized lip sync in style-based generator,'' in \emph{CVPR}, 2023, pp. 1505--1515.
10. J.~Guan, Z.~Xu, H.~Zhou, K.~Wang, S.~He, Z.~Zhang, B.~Liang, H.~Feng, E.~Ding, J.~Liu, J.~Wang, Y.~Zhao, and Z.~Liu, ``Resyncer: Rewiring style-based generator for unified audio-visually synced facial performer,'' in \emph{ECCV}, 2024.
11. L.~Zhang, S.~Liang, Z.~Ge, and T.~Hu, ``Personatalk: Bring attention to your persona in visual dubbing,'' in \emph{ACM SIGGRAPH Asia Conference Proceedings}, ser. SIGGRAPH Asia'24, 2024.
12. X.~Wang, Q.~Xie, J.~Zhu, L.~Xie, and O.~Scharenborg, ``Anyonenet: Synchronized speech and talking head generation for arbitrary persons,'' \emph{IEEE Transactions on Multimedia}, vol.~25, pp. 6717--6728, 2023.
13. S.~Wang, L.~Li, Y.~Ding, and X.~Yu, ``One-shot talking face generation from single-speaker audio-visual correlation learning,'' \emph{Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence}, vol.~36, no.~3, pp. 2531--2539, Jun. 2022.
14. W.~Zhang, X.~Cun, X.~Wang, Y.~Zhang, X.~Shen, Y.~Guo, Y.~Shan, and F.~Wang, ``Sadtalker: Learning realistic 3d motion coefficients for stylized audio-driven single image talking face animation,'' in \emph{CVPR}, 2023, pp. 8652--8661.
15. \BIBentryALTinterwordspacing
Y.~Ma, S.~Zhang, J.~Wang, X.~Wang, Y.~Zhang, and Z.~Deng, ``Dreamtalk: When emotional talking head generation meets diffusion probabilistic models,'' 2024. [Online]. Available: \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.09767}
\BIBentrySTDinterwordspacing
16. M.~Xu and et~al., ``Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait image animation,'' \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08801}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.08801](../2024/2406.08801.md)
17. C.~Wang, K.~Tian, J.~Zhang, Y.~Guan, F.~Luo, F.~Shen, Z.~Jiang, Q.~Gu, X.~Han, and W.~Yang, ``V-express: Conditional dropout for progressive training of portrait video generation,'' \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02511}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.02511](https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.02511)
18. L.~Tian and et~al., ``{EMO}: Emote portrait alive -- generating expressive portrait videos with audio2video diffusion model under weak conditions,'' in \emph{ECCV}, 2025.
19. T.~Liu, C.~Du, S.~Fan, F.~Chen, and K.~Yu, ``Diffdub: Person-generic visual dubbing using inpainting renderer with diffusion auto-encoder,'' in \emph{ICASSP 2024 - 2024 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP)}, 2024, pp. 3630--3634.
20. S.~Wang, Y.~Ma, Y.~Ding, Z.~Hu, C.~Fan, T.~Lv, Z.~Deng, and X.~Yu, ``Styletalk++: A unified framework for controlling the speaking styles of talking heads,'' \emph{IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence}, vol.~46, no.~6, pp. 4331--4347, 2024.
21. W.~Zhong, J.~Li, Y.~Cai, M.~Li, F.~Gao, L.~Lin, and G.~Li, ``Style-preserving lip sync via audio-aware style reference,'' 2025.
22. X.~Ji, C.~Lin, Z.~Ding, Y.~Tai, J.~Yang, J.~Zhu, X.~Hu, J.~Zhang, D.~Luo, and C.~Wang, ``Realtalk: Real-time and realistic audio-driven face generation with 3d facial prior-guided identity alignment network,'' \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18284}, 2024. [arXiv:2406.18284](../2024/2406.18284.md)
23. R.~Rombach, A.~Blattmann, D.~Lorenz, P.~Esser, and B.~Ommer, ``High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,'' in \emph{CVPR}, 2022, pp. 10\,674--10\,685.
24. S.~Shen, W.~Zhao, Z.~Meng, W.~Li, Z.~Zhu, J.~Zhou, and J.~Lu, ``Difftalk: Crafting diffusion models for generalized audio-driven portraits animation,'' in \emph{CVPR}, 2023, pp. 1982--1991.
25. A.~Gu and T.~Dao, ``Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces,'' \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752}, 2024. [arXiv:2312.00752](https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.00752)
26. Z.~Zhang, Z.~Hu, W.~Deng, C.~Fan, T.~Lv, and Y.~Ding, ``Dinet: deformation inpainting network for realistic face visually dubbing on high resolution video,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the Thirty-Seventh AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-Fifth Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Thirteenth Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence}, 2023.
27. J.~Wang, X.~Qian, M.~Zhang, R.~T. Tan, and H.~Li, ``Seeing what you said: Talking face generation guided by a lip reading expert,'' in \emph{CVPR}, jun 2023, pp. 14\,653--14\,662.
28. J.~S. Chung and A.~Zisserman, ``Out of time: Automated lip sync in the wild,'' in \emph{Computer Vision -- ACCV 2016 Workshops}, C.-S. Chen, J.~Lu, and K.-K. Ma, Eds., 2017, pp. 251--263.
29. K.~Cheng, X.~Cun, Y.~Zhang, M.~Xia, F.~Yin, M.~Zhu, X.~Wang, J.~Wang, and N.~Wang, ``Videoretalking: Audio-based lip synchronization for talking head video editing in the wild,'' in \emph{SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers}, ser. SA '22, 2022.
30. L.~Hu, ``Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-to-video synthesis for character animation,'' in \emph{CVPR}, June 2024, pp. 8153--8163.
31. Y.~Guo, C.~Yang, A.~Rao, Z.~Liang, Y.~Wang, Y.~Qiao, M.~Agrawala, D.~Lin, and B.~Dai, ``Animatediff: Animate your personalized text-to-image diffusion models without specific tuning,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2024.
32. Z.~Xu, J.~Zhang, J.~H. Liew, H.~Yan, J.-W. Liu, C.~Zhang, J.~Feng, and M.~Z. Shou, ``Magicanimate: Temporally consistent human image animation using diffusion model,'' in \emph{CVPR}, June 2024, pp. 1481--1490.
33. A.~Vaswani, N.~Shazeer, N.~Parmar, J.~Uszkoreit, L.~Jones, A.~N. Gomez, L.~Kaiser, and I.~Polosukhin, ``Attention is all you need,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems}, ser. NIPS'17, 2017, p. 6000–6010.
34. S.~Schneider, A.~Baevski, R.~Collobert, and M.~Auli, ``{wav2vec: Unsupervised Pre-Training for Speech Recognition},'' in \emph{Proc. Interspeech 2019}, 2019, pp. 3465--3469.
35. A.~Dosovitskiy, L.~Beyer, A.~Kolesnikov, D.~Weissenborn, X.~Zhai, T.~Unterthiner, M.~Dehghani, M.~Minderer, G.~Heigold, S.~Gelly, J.~Uszkoreit, and N.~Houlsby, ``An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale,'' in \emph{International Conference on Learning Representations}, 2021.
36. W.~Peebles and S.~Xie, ``Scalable diffusion models with transformers,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)}, October 2023, pp. 4195--4205.
37. X.~Huang and S.~Belongie, ``Arbitrary style transfer in real-time with adaptive instance normalization,'' in \emph{2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)}, 2017, pp. 1510--1519.
38. Y.~Zhang, Y.~Liu, B.~Xia, B.~Peng, Z.~Yan, E.~Lo, and J.~Jia, ``Magic mirror: Id-preserved video generation in video diffusion transformers,'' 2025.
39. A.~Hatamizadeh and J.~Kautz, ``Mambavision: A hybrid mamba-transformer vision backbone,'' \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08083}, 2024. [arXiv:2407.08083](https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.08083)
40. Y.~Zhang, M.~Liu, Z.~Chen, B.~Wu, Y.~He, C.~Zhan, and W.~Zhou, ``Musetalk: Real-time high quality lip synchorization with latent space inpainting,'' 2024.
41. C.~Lugaresi, J.~Tang, H.~Nash, C.~McClanahan, E.~Uboweja, M.~Hays, F.~Zhang, C.-L. Chang, M.~G. Yong, J.~Lee, W.-T. Chang, W.~Hua, M.~Georg, and M.~Grundmann, ``Mediapipe: A framework for building perception pipelines,'' 2019.
42. M.~Stypulkowski, K.~Vougioukas, S.~He, M.~Zieba, S.~Petridis, and M.~Pantic, ``Diffused heads: Diffusion models beat gans on talking-face generation,'' in \emph{2024 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV)}, jan 2024, pp. 5089--5098.
43. Z.~Chen, J.~Cao, Z.~Chen, Y.~Li, and C.~Ma, ``Echomimic: Lifelike audio-driven portrait animations through editable landmark conditions,'' 2024.
44. \BIBentryALTinterwordspacing
C.~Li, C.~Zhang, W.~Xu, J.~Lin, J.~Xie, W.~Feng, B.~Peng, C.~Chen, and W.~Xing, ``Latentsync: Taming audio-conditioned latent diffusion models for lip sync with syncnet supervision,'' 2025. [Online]. Available: \url{https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.09262}
\BIBentrySTDinterwordspacing
45. J.~S. Chung, A.~Nagrani, and A.~Zisserman, ``{VoxCeleb2: Deep Speaker Recognition},'' in \emph{Proc. Interspeech 2018}, 2018, pp. 1086--1090.
46. Z.~Zhang, L.~Li, Y.~Ding, and C.~Fan, ``Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with a high-resolution audio-visual dataset,'' in \emph{CVPR}, 2021, pp. 3660--3669.
47. J.~Chung, A.~Senior, O.~Vinyals, and A.~Zisserman, ``Lip reading sentences in the wild,'' in \emph{CVPR}, jul 2017, pp. 3444--3453.
48. L.~Xie, X.~Wang, H.~Zhang, C.~Dong, and Y.~Shan, ``Vfhq: A high-quality dataset and benchmark for video face super-resolution,'' in \emph{2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW)}, 2022, pp. 656--665.
49. R.~Zhang, P.~Isola, A.~A. Efros, E.~Shechtman, and O.~Wang, ``The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,'' in \emph{CVPR}, jun 2018, pp. 586--595.
50. M.~Heusel, H.~Ramsauer, T.~Unterthiner, B.~Nessler, and S.~Hochreiter, ``Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems}, 2017, p. 6629–6640.
51. B.~Shi, W.-N. Hsu, K.~Lakhotia, and A.~Mohamed, ``Learning audio-visual speech representation by masked multimodal cluster prediction,'' in \emph{Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)}, 2022.
52. T.~Unterthiner, S.~van Steenkiste, K.~Kurach, R.~Marinier, M.~Michalski, and S.~Gelly, ``Towards accurate generative models of video: A new metric \& challenges,'' \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.01717}, 2019. [arXiv:1812.01717](https://arxiv.org/abs/1812.01717)
53. L.~van~der Maaten and G.~Hinton, ``Visualizing data using t-sne,'' \emph{Journal of Machine Learning Research}, vol.~9, no.~86, pp. 2579--2605, 2008.
54. S.~Luo, Y.~Tan, L.~Huang, J.~Li, and H.~Zhao, ``Latent consistency models: Synthesizing high-resolution images with few-step inference,'' \emph{arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04378}, 2023. [arXiv:2310.04378](https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.04378)
